[Amit Varma]: I often say that we make sense of the world by joining dots and the more dots
[Amit Varma]: we have, the clearer our picture of the world. So how do we gather these dots? The
[Amit Varma]: immediate experiences of our own lives will never add up to enough and we need
[Amit Varma]: to have the humility to recognize this. We need to make an effort to learn about
[Amit Varma]: the world, to see the world through the eyes of others, many others, so that we
[Amit Varma]: can enrich our own understanding. For me, the best way to gather these dots is by
[Amit Varma]: reading books. If you read a lot and your reading is both broad and deep, your
[Amit Varma]: vision is that much more likely to be sharper and clearer. And this is also
[Amit Varma]: true if we have an appreciation of data. What is data but a gathering of dots,
[Amit Varma]: facts about the world that we can bring together to paint a picture in high
[Amit Varma]: definition. Our brains have evolved to prefer stories over numbers, especially
[Amit Varma]: large numbers and complex statistics, which is why so many of the best
[Amit Varma]: storytellers are those who have a sense of the bigger picture. And more
[Amit Varma]: importantly, who actively look at the data to seek out the bigger picture.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and
[Unknown]: behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Rukmini S, a pioneering
[Amit Varma]: data journalist who learned her chops at the Times of India and was the first
[Amit Varma]: data editor at the Hindu. She has written for a series of major publications across
[Amit Varma]: the world. And I'm a bit uncertain about the term data journalist, as I consider
[Amit Varma]: Rukmini an outstanding journalist who also happens to understand and use data
[Amit Varma]: very well, as indeed every journalist should. A few months ago, as this pandemic
[Amit Varma]: got underway, Rukmini started up a groundbreaking podcast called The Moving
[Amit Varma]: Curve, in which she explored her own intellectual curiosity about the pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: Every day, she would ask a question about the unfolding crisis and try to answer
[Amit Varma]: it by examining the research out there, looking at the data and so on. Every
[Amit Varma]: episode was five to 10 minutes long, and she recently hit 100 episodes of The
[Amit Varma]: Moving Curve. I've been planning to ask her on the show for a long time now, and
[Amit Varma]: was delighted when we could finally make it happen. Before we begin with our
[Amit Varma]: episode, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: and much interactivity. It costs rupees 10,000 or $150. You can check out the
[Amit Varma]: details at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. This link will be in the show
[Amit Varma]: notes. If you want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the
[Amit Varma]: words on the page, then the art of clear writing might be just what you need.
[Amit Varma]: November batches begin on Saturday, November 7. So hurry and register before
[Amit Varma]: then. IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Look, really welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you. It's so exciting to be here. I feel a bit like a T20 player who's
[Guest]: walked into a test match, except that you actually can get the T20 numbers. So
[Guest]: that's not a good analogy either.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's not a bad analogy, because there are T20 players who walked into a
[Amit Varma]: test match and completely owned that feel like David Warner, for example, the
[Amit Varma]: first time, you know, he played for the Delhi franchise back in the day, his
[Amit Varma]: teammate Virender Sehwag told him that, you know, you have a game for test
[Amit Varma]: cricket. And that sounded very counterintuitive, because Warner was a bit
[Amit Varma]: of a basher there. But look what happened. He's one of the great players, Steve
[Amit Varma]: Smith, Jaspreet Bumrah. So and I just have to say that I am just an unabashed
[Amit Varma]: admirer of your podcast, The Moving Curve and the things that you've done with it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I don't think I would be able to do something like that. But that kind
[Amit Varma]: of regularity, asking important questions and all of that. But before we kind of
[Amit Varma]: embarrass each other with too much praise, let's, let's move on. I'm very curious to
[Amit Varma]: know about your background. Because, you know, in our minds as often and you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you hear the words, data journalist, which for some reason is how people kind
[Amit Varma]: of refer to you, though, I think that's not I mean, you're obviously just a very
[Amit Varma]: good journalist period. And, you know, but and one of the things that obviously
[Amit Varma]: strikes me about your background is that you were a sort of a hardcore reporter or
[Amit Varma]: regular journalist who was reporting stories and doing all of that. But I'd say
[Amit Varma]: take me even before that, take me to your childhood, what kind of person were you?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of career did you look at? How did you get attracted to journalism and why?
[Guest]: Right. So I do think that anyone who knew me growing up would be quite surprised by
[Guest]: this turn, because I never really demonstrated any particular affinity for math,
[Guest]: though I enjoyed it in school. So I grew up in Pune, my parents there, I am very much a
[Guest]: Punekar in most ways. I left home after I did a BA in psychology at Ferguson College for
[Guest]: reasons that I could not tell you anymore. You know, one of those things that you drift
[Guest]: into when you're 18. I enjoyed it. I do feel like it exposed me to statistics and
[Guest]: experimental science for the first time. So that was interesting. But somewhere in the
[Guest]: back of my mind, I always knew that what I was going to get into was some form of writing.
[Guest]: I don't think I knew anything about how journalism worked, but that seemed like the
[Guest]: sort of thing that people who like to write did. So I went to, you know, from Pune, the
[Guest]: Asian College of Journalism in Chennai was very far, very expensive at the time. The more
[Guest]: well-known and familiar yet well-regarded option was the Sophia Polytechnic in Mumbai.
[Guest]: So what I did is I did a postgraduate diploma in social communications media. That's the
[Guest]: mouthful that that course is called. And I loved it. It's women's only college, 30 students
[Guest]: living in a hostel for the first time, very political place and with very specific
[Guest]: political ideas. And, you know, I'm sure we'll talk about that later, because one of the
[Guest]: things that that I spend a lot of time thinking about and thinking about how journalism can
[Guest]: get better about is about how to be less polarised. And I wouldn't say that that
[Guest]: that wasn't polarised too. It was sort of like being, I suppose, on a mini GNU sort of equivalent
[Guest]: then. But yeah, again, none of this is a criticism of the course, which I absolutely loved.
[Guest]: P Sainath was one of our teachers. He's someone I hugely admire and love very much. He's
[Guest]: family for me a bit now. So that was the first time I read nonfiction. That was the first
[Guest]: time I read newspapers regularly. That was the first time I felt engaged with any sort of
[Guest]: political thinking at all. I was very much one of those persons who floated through
[Guest]: undergraduate college, building wonderful personal relationships, falling in love,
[Guest]: joining a rock band and having the rest of the world entirely pass me by. So,
[Guest]: so far it was when I woke up. And I'm very much one of those people who's everything,
[Guest]: politically awakening, learning, everything happened on this job since I sort of sleepwalked
[Guest]: through college in that respect. I loved it. I think I did well. And immediately after,
[Guest]: it was a one year course. Immediately after that, there were some campus placements and I started
[Guest]: an internship at the times of India and Bombay. And I ended up working there for four years in
[Guest]: all. And that was, as you mentioned, very much regular journalism. So the first few months was
[Guest]: very much, you were the person who was, you were the spot boy. You were sent to run for everything,
[Guest]: any press release, any event. You never knew what your day was like. Anything that was in the
[Guest]: furthest possible suburb, you were likely to be sent there. You know, an experience that nothing
[Guest]: else will give you. Just knowing the local train system in and out, knowing every suburb in and
[Guest]: out. So I did that. Then I covered the education beat for a little while. And the last beat that I
[Guest]: covered in Mumbai was state government. In the course of news reporting, I ended up doing a bit
[Guest]: of crime reporting and got very interested in legal reporting because of some trials that I
[Guest]: ended up covering quite regularly, although I wasn't a court journalist. And then after that,
[Guest]: after I did that for four years, I went to the School of Oriental and African Studies in London
[Guest]: to do a Master's in Development Studies. So that again, in that respect, was a sort of
[Guest]: standard lefty program. I enjoyed it, but I was also very sure that I immediately wanted to get
[Guest]: back to Indian journalism that, you know, I really felt that that that was the most productive use
[Guest]: of my time. I was really hungry to come back and work. Around that time, or a little before that,
[Guest]: the Times of India had set up in Delhi, a group called the Times Insight Group, which is a small
[Guest]: team of reporters focused on data journalism. So, you know, I think most people don't associate the
[Guest]: Times of India with data journalism, but that really is the first place that set up a systematic
[Guest]: team to do this. So Jaideep Bose, the editor then and now who had hired me in Bombay, when I came
[Guest]: back, I talked to him about things that I could do, and he mentioned this team. Because one of
[Guest]: the things that had happened is when I was doing my Master's, I felt I was reading World Bank
[Guest]: reports for the first time, you know, it's not that they hadn't existed on the internet, I had
[Guest]: just not known anything about it. And I felt that there was so much research that I was reading,
[Guest]: that I should have been incorporating into news stories. So it wasn't yet data as such, it was
[Guest]: more the feeling that there's rigorous research and academic work that I should be incorporating
[Guest]: into news reporting. And then it was really three years of learning on the job. I joined that team
[Guest]: in Delhi, I moved to Delhi, I got to do a whole lot of very sort of straight place data journalism,
[Guest]: which is, NSS has put out a report today, report about it. World Bank has put this report out,
[Guest]: reported it. I'm really glad I got to do that. And really on data work, I was starting from
[Guest]: learning how to do addition and subtraction in an Excel sheet, I hadn't done anything of that
[Guest]: sort before. And that group is headed still by Shankar Agaraman, who's a, you know, old school
[Guest]: financial journalist, very well known among the old school Delhi journalists, a great boss,
[Guest]: someone who really shines on election and budget days in particular. And again, this is not
[Guest]: something people give the Times of India credit for, but it truly does shine on election days,
[Guest]: especially. And the other great thing I got to do then was travel. There was there was nothing
[Guest]: that no one said no to me for any idea I had, you know, around then in 2009. And then food
[Guest]: prices started escalating the price of daal, all of that started escalating. So I could write about
[Guest]: it and look at the numbers and do all of that, but then also go to Bundelkhand and report on it.
[Guest]: And these were just things off the top of my head, I wanted to do the Bihar elections,
[Guest]: because it seemed like development indicators had really improved in Mitesh's first term,
[Guest]: I got to go and cover the Bihar elections, I wanted to write on the panchayat system,
[Guest]: because I could see that there was incremental change going on in political representation there.
[Guest]: So I got to cover Rajasthan's panchayat elections. Similarly, what political representation I got to
[Guest]: report from Nagaland, where there has never been a woman MLA and I got to, you know,
[Guest]: trail two women candidates as they went campaigning. So that that I really I remember
[Guest]: feeling then that I was getting paid to understand the country. And just nothing I could have asked
[Guest]: for better than that. I did feel like I was maybe getting a bit slow and maybe a bit lazy,
[Guest]: you know, spending too much time unproductively staring at the screen sometimes in office. So
[Guest]: I'm glad then that Siddharth Vaidhyarajan, now the Wire's editor, then the Hindu's editor got
[Guest]: in touch with me because I do think I was stagnating a bit then. He hired me to the Hindu
[Guest]: in 2013. And I was there for three years. And after Siddharth left and Malini Parthasarathy
[Guest]: took over, she made me the data editor then, which was the first Indian publication to have a data
[Guest]: editor position. So both Siddharth and Malini did have that vision for that vision, that focus,
[Guest]: that emphasis on data over there. So that was the last sort of mainstream media full time job I had.
[Guest]: In 2016, I quit the Hindu, I worked for the Huff Post for a little while doing similar work.
[Guest]: And since 2018, I've been doing this independently. And I moved to Chennai in 2016.
[Amit Varma]: So the lesson for this for people listening, by the way, is that good Indian podcasters come out
[Amit Varma]: of Ferguson College Pune because I also graduated from there. Yeah, I passed out in 94. So I think
[Amit Varma]: that might have been a little before your time. Yeah. So what did you do in a rock band?
[Guest]: I sang. Oh, wow. Amazing. Are there videos on YouTube that we can embarrass you with?
[Guest]: There are pictures from Pune times that my parents can embarrass me with.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, instantly 1000s of listeners immediately try to Google and
[Amit Varma]: figure that out. What I find very interesting about this whole narrative, and this is something
[Amit Varma]: that I've been thinking about for a while now, is the distinction between the abstract and the
[Amit Varma]: the abstract and the concrete in people's experiences. Like it strikes me that when you go
[Amit Varma]: to college, or when you go to whatever academic thing you do, you're being taught abstract ideas,
[Amit Varma]: you're being taught abstractions about the world. And then at some point, of course, if you remain
[Amit Varma]: in academics, you can just remain in that abstract realm forever. But if you go out in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: and you actually, you know, engage with it, then you get exposed to concrete realities. And it
[Amit Varma]: seems to me that this distinction between abstraction and reality is something that
[Amit Varma]: can possibly apply to journalists like you in many ways, like first, you do the journalistic
[Amit Varma]: training and all of that, and then you're out in the real world, you're reporting from the weeds.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one sort of element of it. Another element of it is just how you engage with data,
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, many people would and we'll, of course, explore this later in the episode in more
[Amit Varma]: detail. But people will often bring their own biases to data and try to make it conform to
[Amit Varma]: the narratives. But to do that, you really have to understand the data intuitively and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, it strikes me that it might actually have been a feature and not a bug that
[Amit Varma]: you had to learn all that from scratch how to add and subtract in Excel, for example, which I still
[Amit Varma]: don't know. And, you know, which would have also given you a concrete sense of data and its
[Amit Varma]: limitations and what it can be used for. Is there something kind of to that, like, as you engage
[Amit Varma]: more and more concretely with India, are your old frames sort of collapsing and new frames taking
[Amit Varma]: their place? Is there a journey like that, that you sort of consciously thought about?
[Guest]: Yeah, you've absolutely hit the nail on the head, because that is what has been my process for the
[Guest]: last five years. So I would say that I still have, you know, largely left of center politics and
[Guest]: ideas. But one of the big things which has really come through both the points that you mentioned
[Guest]: simultaneously, which is one part of it is through reporting directly and part of it is going with
[Guest]: the data. You know, it didn't even come as a moment of reckoning that I felt that I was,
[Guest]: you know, confronting all that I believed or held dear and that it was all withering away.
[Guest]: I suppose it had been happening continuously and didn't really come as a surprise to me,
[Guest]: these realizations. But yes, accepting that a lot of what the left in India in particular holds
[Guest]: true and passes on through universities or even through leftist academics and the journalists who
[Guest]: faithfully report everything that they say is deceptive, it's problematic, it's not doing anyone
[Guest]: much good. So, you know, all of this sounds a bit quaint, all this UPA era stuff is now very quaint
[Guest]: that we were having all these intense discussions about things like the public distribution system,
[Guest]: but that's what we were discussing back then. So I think, you know, things like accepting that,
[Guest]: you know, holding the public distribution system as a model for something that must be upheld
[Guest]: at every cost and anything that's seen as an alternative like cash or a universal basic
[Guest]: income must be sort of reflexively attacked is something that I had to unlearn. And I'm,
[Guest]: you know, happy to have been able to do that. And I consistently find that the data and research
[Guest]: continues to back these things up. The other thing, all sort of mass publicly provided goods
[Guest]: that I remain, you know, firm supporter of in the middle of a pandemic, the importance of
[Guest]: affordable, accessible public health, it's there for everyone to see. But to go on talking about
[Guest]: these things as, but we must strengthen public schools, but we must strengthen the public health
[Guest]: system without accepting how discriminatory and demeaning it can be to have to be entangled with
[Guest]: it is privilege, is ultimately privilege. So the economist Jishnu Das is someone whose work
[Guest]: I admire very much. And I like engaging with because it makes me rethink things that I might
[Guest]: have gone in thinking of a certain way. And I think his work on healthcare has been one of those
[Guest]: things that I really feel I wish a lot of journalism students would look at and read because
[Guest]: things like accepting that an MBBS doctor in a public hospital necessarily cares more and provides
[Guest]: better care, gives better prescriptions even than quack in a private clinic is something we would
[Guest]: all assume and something we would all, you know, put our weight behind, but he's consistently shown
[Guest]: that not to be the case, you know, good, solid research in both urban and rural settings in
[Guest]: Madhya Pradesh and Delhi. I feel in 2012 and 2013, these are things that I was confronting. And at
[Guest]: that time, it felt like a debate with two sides. But now I see there are a number of people who
[Guest]: sort of, you know, exist in the middle and don't see these as choices. But as let's all start with
[Guest]: the belief that care or education should be something that is available to everybody, but at
[Guest]: their own, with their own agency, with their own self-respect alive, you know. So yeah, I think
[Guest]: both reporting and dealing with the data has made me rethink many of those things. And when you talk
[Guest]: about the value, if any, in having to do everything longhand in the hard way, it really is true. It
[Guest]: sounds like some, you know, some fuddy-duddy thing that your dad says, right, which is that you'll
[Guest]: only know it when you write it out by hand, but you will only figure it out when you've done some
[Guest]: data stuff manually is something that I've just had to accept. There's a lot of, you know, I'm
[Guest]: sure we'll talk about this in a bit, but I spend a shocking amount of my time doing work manually.
[Guest]: And this isn't a humble brag. If I had better skills, I wouldn't be doing this manually. It's
[Guest]: a colossal waste of time. And anyone who's building their skills right now should build skills so that
[Guest]: they're not doing what I'm doing. This is not smart. But there are, you know, every time I think,
[Guest]: I was just thinking when I go on Amit's podcast, maybe I should put out an appeal to people,
[Guest]: to anyone who wants to do this work for me, you know, paid for credit, that I need developers.
[Guest]: Now that I don't work in a newsroom anymore, I can't hire a developer and I don't earn enough
[Guest]: to like hire a full time developer for myself. So I said, you know, this sort of geeky person,
[Guest]: if they listen to the show, I should put this up. But it's not just not letting go of control,
[Guest]: which is a problem. But it also is that reading so much of this stuff manually gives me insights
[Guest]: that I wouldn't miss otherwise. So just to give you an example, I've really enjoyed engaging with
[Guest]: legal data. And while this sounds like something that I'm doing that's complicated or with great
[Guest]: skills, but a lot of it is just reading court judgments. Again, if there were good machine
[Guest]: learning tools, I'm sure people could reduce the sort of donkey work they put into it. But a lot of
[Guest]: what I do is just reading a lot of court judgments. So there was a point at which I was
[Guest]: having to manually read Metropolitan Magistrate Court rulings in Mumbai, because I was looking
[Guest]: actually for sexual assault cases for something specific I was working on. But while I was
[Guest]: looking for this, I ended up noticing that on the daily sort of docket of most judges,
[Guest]: there was a large number of cases of particular IPC section, and I was couldn't really understand
[Guest]: why it was coming up that often. Then, when I looked at the section, it was causing hurt using
[Guest]: a poisonous substance. And I couldn't for the life of me figure out why I was seeing so many every
[Guest]: day. Most Metropolitan Magistrates were seeing many of these cases every day. And then I started
[Guest]: noticing that they were all acquittals, all acquittals. So I just couldn't figure out what
[Guest]: was going on. So what I ended up getting to the bottom of, and then I ended up investigating and
[Guest]: writing about that separately, was that at that time, the drug mephedrone, which was called
[Guest]: Meow Meow on the street, was not in the NDPS, the India's Narcotics Act. It wasn't in the schedule
[Guest]: that gives cops the powers to go after it in those ways. So the only IPC section that they felt
[Guest]: they could use to catch this peddlers was this one. But it's completely the wrong section,
[Guest]: because it requires you to not just prove possession at that moment, but also intend to
[Guest]: cause hurt, which a peddler doesn't have. So it was one of the most common cases that
[Guest]: Metropolitan Magistrates were looking at. And it had a 100% acquittal rate.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's the seen and the unseen. I was just thinking about that, that this is what I saw.
[Guest]: And this is the entire world of things behind it. I ended up going to Mumbai for it and speaking to
[Guest]: the NDPS person and, you know, a couple of ACPs as well. And they were all like,
[Guest]: yes, we know that it wasn't the right one to use, sorry, but there's nothing we could do about it.
[Guest]: And the judges were so sick of these cases coming to them, because in each one they had to say,
[Guest]: you haven't shown intent to hurt, acquit, acquit, acquit. And the cops were also using it to do a
[Guest]: bit of, you know, petty score settling. And there were people who'd been in jail without bail for a
[Guest]: year, I found, you know, the disproportionately high number of Muslim men in it. So there was
[Amit Varma]: all of that going on. No, it's so fascinating. I mean, it's almost like you're a forensic detective
[Amit Varma]: and you're going through the data to figure all this out. No, I read in one of your interviews
[Amit Varma]: about how you mentioned that, possibly during this case that you had like these hundreds of
[Amit Varma]: tabs open, and you're manually going through one judgment at a time. And that's just incredible.
[Amit Varma]: So I actually second your appeal. And if there are listeners of the show who can create solutions for
[Amit Varma]: this, whether at scale or whether at an individual level, please do get in touch with Rukmini.
[Amit Varma]: Another part of your sort of personal journey, which you also, I think, referred to
[Amit Varma]: in one of your interviews as being interesting and affecting your perspective was moving away
[Amit Varma]: from Delhi, shifting to Chennai, having kids, choosing to kind of be located there. Did that
[Amit Varma]: also like shift your frame of reference and make you, you know, take you out of that Delhi journalism
[Guest]: bubble, so to say, and make you look at things differently? It did. But the more I think about it,
[Guest]: the more I want to make sure that I don't start looking back at that experience as something
[Guest]: frothy and silly and, you know, full of narcissistic people who only talk about each
[Guest]: other's work. There is that too. But that's not all of Delhi's journalism. And to everyone who
[Guest]: wants to continue in, at least in public policy journalism, I would highly recommend working in
[Guest]: Delhi for a while. I feel like the journalism I'm able to do now, and in all sorts of ways,
[Guest]: even personally, is because I was in Delhi for those key years in between. Moving away from
[Guest]: Delhi has, it's made me more conscious of how it's impossible to understand some of the things that
[Guest]: matter so deeply to people from a particular part of the country, not just from Delhi, but from
[Guest]: anywhere else. So being in Chennai, I feel like I could see the media trying to make sense and
[Guest]: grapple with this jallikattu issue when it happened a few years ago. I still sense it when they try to
[Guest]: write about NEET, the medical entrance exam and, you know, Tamil Nadu's feelings on it. And I just
[Guest]: realized how lost in translation this stuff is. Things like self-respect are impossible to, are
[Guest]: impossible to communicate through journalism sometimes. And it underpins so much of what goes
[Guest]: on in Tamil Nadu in particular. So, you know, I think while a lot of people who move away from
[Guest]: Delhi or even people who talk self-deprecatingly about being in Delhi diminish it a fair bit,
[Guest]: I do think that it's possible to move away and write, you know, more considered stuff only after
[Guest]: you've actually been there first. So I'm very happy for, I loved Delhi. I loved living there.
[Guest]: I loved working in journalism there. And, you know, the conversations I had and the arguments
[Guest]: over public policy, over politics, you know, over dinner and people's houses on terraces,
[Guest]: they were very formative. And I still, they are the sort of contours of the debates and
[Guest]: discussions I'm still having in a sense. Having kids, yeah, that now that's a big change in
[Guest]: multiple ways. I mean, one of it is just the time part of it. So it just means that there's a
[Guest]: significant shift in the type of journalism I do because of the hours in the day I have.
[Guest]: It's also definitely changed my consumption diet of journalism. My, I mean, some of it is just,
[Guest]: it sounds so silly and childish to say, but I know that a lot of parents feel this is that I can't
[Guest]: consume violence much at all. I'm someone who's always pushed back against things like trigger
[Guest]: warnings. And I still would a bit in journalism. I mean, I'm sorry, not in an entertainment show,
[Guest]: but even in journalism, I have no, I cannot consume violence anymore. And also, I mean,
[Guest]: it really came home to me in the pandemic that I no longer can keep up with things on a sort of
[Guest]: minute to minute basis anymore, which then means that my need to distill information both for
[Guest]: myself and then for people who read me or listen to me has now become a part of my journalism.
[Guest]: Because it really is that the only time that I really can think at length about the world is
[Guest]: sort of at the end of the day. And I'm glad that I'm not reacting to events immediately,
[Guest]: and that I have had a few hours of considered time to think about it. So it's a luxury, but
[Guest]: I'm glad that I'm able to do that sort of work. Now, the thing about journalism is
[Guest]: across the board, and definitely I see this about data journalism teams in newsrooms is that
[Guest]: you're sort of expected to do a bit of everything, which is you have to put out the daily NSSO,
[Guest]: put out this report sort of thing too, as well as the well-considered longer things.
[Guest]: And that just leaves very little space to think. Yeah, and I mean, it was surprising to me,
[Guest]: it made me very happy. And it was surprising to me that especially during the pandemic,
[Guest]: when people were home and so much more housework, so much more childcare,
[Guest]: other people were suddenly consuming news in a similar sort of way. And then that feeling of,
[Guest]: especially in the beginning of the pandemic, I mean, it's hard to remember it now, but we were
[Guest]: starting from figuring out, is this a virus or a bacteria? How do these things work? Does it
[Guest]: move through coughing? So it suddenly felt that, wow, it's nine o'clock and I just check the news.
[Guest]: And okay, now we know for the first time that it isn't mutating, or something huge and significant
[Guest]: had happened. So I think other people too were feeling that need, that I can't follow
[Guest]: ball by ball commentary of this. I need to know by the end of the day what happens.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, a couple of tangential questions, which I hadn't planned to ask, but they came up
[Amit Varma]: from, you know, what you were just saying. And question number one is, you know, writers often
[Amit Varma]: talk about how when they become writers, the quality of their reading changes,
[Amit Varma]: they start reading differently. Earlier, they are sort of reading whatever books they are just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they're just going with the story or whatever. But when they become writers themselves,
[Amit Varma]: they start noticing nuanced aspects of the craft and all of that. Now, you spoke a little earlier
[Amit Varma]: about the consumption diet changing as you had your kids and you had responsibilities at home
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, the way you consumed it changed from a real time thing where, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: might be tracking everything on Twitter all the time and all of that. But when you look at
[Amit Varma]: journalism today, has that also changed over the years that you're also looking at the craft and
[Amit Varma]: practice of journalism with that critical eye of someone who does it herself? And also as a sort of
[Amit Varma]: an adjunct question to that, does your sort of understanding of data, then sort of also affect
[Amit Varma]: how you look at the work of others? And does it then seem that much more inadequate and misinformed?
[Guest]: Right. So one of the most frustrating things to me that continues, see, the thing is, I'm very
[Guest]: much a mainstream media person. And even though I'm not in newsroom now, I sort of think and
[Guest]: even plan or imagine very much around the newsroom. So it's incredibly frustrating to me
[Guest]: to see that although newsroom integration is something that has existed on a Microsoft,
[Guest]: on a PPT slides for the last 10 years in every presentation made to anyone in the media,
[Guest]: it's not happening in any meaningful way. And I see this particularly for data stuff. So,
[Guest]: you know, a couple of things have changed in how I consume the news. One is time, one is
[Guest]: reading much more on my phone and, you know, than reading physical newspapers. And in the sort of
[Guest]: stuff that I want to read considering, as you're saying, considering what I want to write as well.
[Guest]: I always find it very amusing when journalists sort of express fears about bots, because so much
[Guest]: of the time journalists are actually writing like bots. So one of the things about COVID coverage
[Guest]: that I've noticed is that I regularly open something that I feel was written by a bot,
[Guest]: because it will say so many cases today and this region more and that region less. And
[Guest]: it's painful to think that it wasn't written by a bot. This shouldn't be what, and this is not one
[Guest]: news article, right? If you put the same search words in Google News, you'll find about 50 Indian
[Guest]: publications alone will have written exactly the same thing. So I'm very much a fan of lots of
[Guest]: little regular news. I enjoy my T.O.I. kind of bits of everything in the city news, I think.
[Guest]: I think it works very well for a city newspaper. I don't think that that's a bad way of going about
[Guest]: it. But if you look at it as a consumer, not as a captive consumer of one newspaper,
[Guest]: it's incredible how little value add most news articles are doing and what a waste of time it is
[Guest]: for the journalists who are working really hard to put that out. Yes, the working on data has
[Guest]: made it impossible for me now to see a good news report that lacks that. So for example,
[Guest]: it's ruined political reporting for me because I just cannot wrap my head around the I landed
[Guest]: in this constituency, one JAT is saying this, one Abhikash Mann is saying this, one SCN. I
[Guest]: cannot wrap my head around that kind of journalism anymore because I don't know what to do with it.
[Guest]: And most large Indian states are pretty well covered by opinion polling. Now there's differences
[Guest]: in the quality of the polling. But to read one of these, you know, parachuted, even if not
[Guest]: parachuted, even by people who deeply understand the region, I just find it impossible to read it
[Guest]: anymore. It shouldn't. These are, you know, hardworking journalists who are going out there
[Guest]: and as such getting you the voices from the ground. But I don't know what to do with it
[Guest]: anymore. I don't know what part of my brain that's thinking about an election to put it into
[Guest]: anymore. It's like watching a fun show now. It's not something that I can slot into any usable
[Guest]: thing. And I think a lot of political reporters feel the other way. They feel very frustrated by
[Guest]: opinion polling, heavy reporting, which they feel is like missing all the nuances on the ground.
[Guest]: But and opinion polls get it so wrong too, right? So they do feel that how can you hold this as
[Guest]: some sort of gospel when they're getting it wrong? We get the real feel on the ground. But yeah,
[Guest]: that's what it's done for me. And another thing is when there are elements that can be answered
[Guest]: through numbers, when it doesn't happen, then it leaves me very deeply dissatisfied. So more than
[Guest]: even looking at the craft of writing differently, what I've been doing a bit in the last few months
[Guest]: is looking at podcasts differently. I always listen to them a bit, but I think I listen to
[Guest]: journalism podcasts a little more now. In general, I feel like I hear too much from journalists,
[Guest]: and I try not to listen to more of them, especially American journalists. But there
[Guest]: were a couple of podcasts that I wanted to listen to. And one that I was listening to over the last
[Guest]: few days was called Canary by the Washington Post. And it's by the journalist Amy Britton.
[Guest]: The entire podcast covers her investigation into, well, it starts into a sexual assault trial.
[Guest]: Now, this is something I feel very strongly about. Not strongly, it's something I sort of
[Guest]: engage deeply in, and I'm not sure yet what to feel about the reporting of sexual assault.
[Guest]: You know, it's beyond any, nobody still needs to discuss the fact that the way women complainants
[Guest]: are written about is a problem, that trials through the judicial system, the questions that
[Guest]: are still allowed, the way the police behaves, all of that is a problem. But I still have a
[Guest]: problem with over-involved journalism around sexual assault, starting from the point of using
[Guest]: things like victim and perpetrator instead of complainant and accused, all of that stuff.
[Guest]: So, this podcast centers, starts around a sexual assault trial in which the man admits to the
[Guest]: crime, but it seems as if the judge has given him a lower sentence. And then what we end up
[Guest]: finding out is that after she writes about, Amy Britton writes about this trial, because the
[Guest]: complainant didn't take it lying down, and she started, you know, pasting flyers around the city
[Guest]: saying that this person has been convicted, he's admitted to it, he did, you know, he was a serial
[Guest]: offender, but see, it hasn't, you know, he was back at his job, in fact, he'd got a promotion,
[Guest]: stuff like that. It was all factual, what she was putting out. And after she wrote, Amy Britton
[Guest]: wrote about it, she was contacted by a woman who ended up telling her the story of how she was
[Guest]: herself systematically sexually harassed and molested by the judge in the case, you know,
[Guest]: many years before. So, that part is really a model of journalism. It's, you know, corroboration,
[Guest]: contemporaneous accounts, letters, all of that, none of which you see in, you know, sexual assault.
[Guest]: This isn't sexual assault, this is a complaint of a sexual assault, right, not a trial. You never
[Guest]: see that in the coverage here, and it's great to see that. But I can see her sort of moving this
[Guest]: two words. So, did this, his own experience affect his sentencing and the way he was as a judge
[Guest]: because of what he had done in his own life? And what happens, she puts her data journalist onto
[Guest]: it, the Washington Post data journalist, and ultimately, they come up short because they just
[Guest]: can't sort out the court data. And part of me was feeling, well, you know, open 100 tabs and read
[Guest]: them one by one, but also there was some information they just could not get. So, she doesn't answer
[Guest]: that part. So, she says, I don't have an answer on that. And to me, that felt, I felt like I was
[Guest]: being led down a path and then just completely, you know, disappointed on that, because I did
[Guest]: want that data part in that story. Otherwise, this was a very well told story about how one judge
[Guest]: 30 years ago had sexually harassed and molested someone. And that's, that's not the story that I
[Guest]: felt I was being sold at all. So, yeah, it really does take away from my enjoyment of a lot of
[Guest]: reporting now. And of course, when in cases where I can see that the data exists and should have
[Guest]: been used, and maybe in some cases would have even not answered exactly that, as I said,
[Guest]: particularly for political reporting, it's absolutely ruined election coverage for me now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm struck by a couple of the things you said. One, of course, I like your, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it made me almost LOL, when you said that so many people write like bots, and you can't make
[Amit Varma]: out the difference. Because I think, you know, we as journalists and writers, we can fall into such
[Amit Varma]: reflexive habits of both thinking and writing, that for all practical purposes, we might as well
[Amit Varma]: be bots, except that we are incompetent bots, because we don't have that kind of computing
[Amit Varma]: power. Like I often say that Trump would fail the Turing test. And I think that might well be
[Amit Varma]: true of many other humans as well. The second part that you said that really struck me and I'm
[Amit Varma]: obviously going to search out canary and binge on it now is a bit where journalist at the end says
[Amit Varma]: that I don't really have an answer, which is so refreshing, because there are, you know, it's in
[Amit Varma]: India, for example, it's almost like you have a compulsion to give an answer. And this percolates
[Amit Varma]: down for some strange reason to everyday life where if you ask anyone on the street, the
[Amit Varma]: directions to somewhere, even if they don't know, they will feel compelled to tell you that
[Amit Varma]: wahan jaiye, wahan se daine, wahan se baine, and so on and so forth. My other sort of question,
[Amit Varma]: which came out of what you were saying earlier was, you know, when you were talking about how
[Amit Varma]: moving to the south, you realize that there are areas which are, for example, not covered by Delhi
[Amit Varma]: questions that they are not asking, and so on. And I was being interviewed for another podcast
[Amit Varma]: today where I was chatting about TikTok, where, you know, I taught a brief course on TikTok in
[Amit Varma]: Indian society. And I'm quite, you know, I love TikTok. And one of the things that to me TikTok
[Amit Varma]: did was that before it came along, popular culture had arbiters in the sense that, you know, you had
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood and it is as one example, you have other film industries also. But for example, you have
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood, they're based in Bombay, there are elites who run them, some of them are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these old school elites who have these regressive attitudes from the past been in Bombay all their
[Amit Varma]: lives. Others have, you know, are all your foreign educated young elites who've come in with their
[Amit Varma]: attitudes, and they don't get the real India at all. And what TikTok kind of did was that it
[Amit Varma]: empowered millions of people, not just in terms of letting them express themselves, but of giving
[Amit Varma]: them a platform where other people like them were expressing themselves. And suddenly that became
[Amit Varma]: the popular culture, you know, bottoms up kind of way. And it was not just, you know, what these
[Amit Varma]: arbiters kind of put out. And it struck me while you were speaking, and I know this is a bit of a
[Amit Varma]: tangent, but it struck me while you were speaking that, you know, is there a case to be made that
[Amit Varma]: that is what the situation is in Indian journalism as well, that you have these arbiters, you have
[Amit Varma]: these, you know, big media houses, even where you have independent outfits that do such amazing work
[Amit Varma]: like Stolen Wire, and so on. They are still run by conventional journalists who have the
[Amit Varma]: conventional points of view, you know, and maybe they're all really missing things, not out of any
[Amit Varma]: blindness or incapacity, but it's just the way that it is. And, you know, that there are gaps
[Guest]: there that could be filled. Yeah, I do think that we have not allowed ourselves to go crazy a little
[Guest]: bit trying to think both about form and content. So I do, you know, even when I was writing
[Guest]: data stories, and that's sometimes still feedback I might still get, which is that,
[Guest]: why don't you humanize it a little, and then the sort of temptation to have the first paragraph
[Guest]: being a sort of archetype of the type of person that the data story describes. And then in paragraph
[Guest]: two, you come to the data element that sort of contextualizes. I see that in a fair amount of
[Guest]: data journalism. And I feel like what that does is allow the reporter to, if it is a choice to
[Guest]: tick the box that I spoke to real people, this wasn't just Amche journalism, I included human
[Guest]: aspects in it. I brought in an element of creativity into what's otherwise quite cool.
[Guest]: So yeah, you know, it's so hard to think of a piece of journalism that truly surprises you,
[Guest]: right. And it doesn't have to be that way. And I agree with you that I don't understand why
[Guest]: newer places have not allowed themselves to experiment with that, to the point that they
[Guest]: really read like the Indian Express if they're one sort of journalism. So there was and I was
[Guest]: looking trying to look this up before this call, but I didn't get to the name in time,
[Guest]: you might remember this. At the beginning of the pandemic, there was a guy who wrote a piece for
[Guest]: the Atlantic, I want to say, which sort of described what happens to your body when the
[Guest]: virus hits you. But through a hypothetical story of a man who's, you know, meets a friend for lunch
[Guest]: without realizing it. But the science in it was hardcore, it, you know, got right into all of the
[Guest]: cells and all of that. So I felt like I did actually learn about how the virus does the
[Guest]: human body and what it does. That was the first time I sort of properly understood what the
[Guest]: cytokine storm even means. Though it was told in a sort of semi fictionalized way. And, you know,
[Guest]: I just remember that just struck me also right now, because these kinds of stories that truly
[Guest]: surprise you, I feel like I can really count them because there are so few when the form really
[Guest]: takes you by surprise. I think people are doing much more inventive stuff in video. So that's
[Guest]: where you occasionally see people breaking out of that very old school NDTV documentary kind of
[Guest]: format of reporting, reporting on everything. And the other thing that struck me when you were
[Guest]: giving a TikTok example, and when I was thinking about the South is that, to me in a way, Tamil,
[Guest]: which I am in no way fluent in, and I knew no Tamil until I moved to Chennai, and I'm still
[Guest]: not great at it. It was like that. It was like, you know, what maybe learning about TikTok felt
[Guest]: like to you seeing this entire universe of people who other filters and bubbles had not brought to
[Guest]: you maybe or to any TikTok user. Tamil feels like that to me. And I've got nowhere near, you know,
[Guest]: even reading. So it's not literature. It's just popular culture that I am in some ways able to
[Guest]: consume right now. Everyone likes to say this about their own language, but I truly so far feel
[Guest]: that the Tamil meme industry is just off the hook. They are so funny, so quick, so savage.
[Guest]: And these are some of the great, you know, untranslatable, because again, when I see
[Guest]: the Tamil pop culture that filters up and makes it to the rest of the country,
[Guest]: it's the most boring, sanitized, sort of yuppie stuff that gets popular. The guys who are on the,
[Guest]: you know, comedy circuits, but the stuff that's actually getting shared over WhatsApp or that's
[Guest]: really, you know, popular among friends or my husband and his friends over here is so much
[Guest]: more subversive. So it's rare. Well, something like TikTok would be something that opens these
[Guest]: worlds to you later in life, right? I think I have no brain cells left for any more new social
[Guest]: media. So I've given up on that now. But I hope that Tamil can be that for me a little bit, you
[Guest]: know, this opening up of people of a culture that arbiters had not, my own arbiters had not allowed
[Amit Varma]: to get to me so far. That's fascinating. I was just trying to look for the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the story in the Atlantic, which you were mentioning, we'll take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and come back to that. I suspect it might be by either Ed Yong or Yasha Monk,
[Amit Varma]: or those were the not one of them. Okay, so let's take a quick commercial break. And then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: during that commercial break, we can look up the story and, you know, tell our listeners who it is.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll be back in a minute.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the show
[Amit Varma]: alive. The Scene and The Unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting together many
[Amit Varma]: stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken up
[Amit Varma]: to the insane engagement level of podcasts. And I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping
[Amit Varma]: this thing going. And that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every episode
[Amit Varma]: of The Scene and The Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever
[Amit Varma]: you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing
[Amit Varma]: an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription. The Scene and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in. This is just a gesture of
[Amit Varma]: appreciation. Help keep this thing going. sceneunseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen. I'm chatting with Rukmini S about data journalism,
[Amit Varma]: COVID and we both have sort of a sheepish smile on our faces right now because before the break,
[Amit Varma]: we promised you we'll find you a link to the story she mentioned. And we have failed despite our
[Amit Varma]: substantial googling skills. So but it will be in the show notes because that gives us a few
[Amit Varma]: days to find it. We're recording this on Monday, October 19. It comes out this Sunday. So without
[Amit Varma]: finding it, it's going to come tonight. Yeah, yeah, eventually. And even though I haven't read
[Amit Varma]: the story, I suspect I can't sleep. One has discovered it. Let's get back to you know,
[Amit Varma]: your fascinating journey, discovering data. I mean, I mean, one thing that often strikes me is
[Amit Varma]: that I just find that term itself data journalism kind of odd because it's almost like saying,
[Amit Varma]: oh, that person is a word journalist or that person's the part of journalism he does is
[Amit Varma]: writing or reporting or whatever. And to me, all of those are kind of a package which come together.
[Amit Varma]: If you are a reporter or a journalist, you are supposed to examine the facts. And data after all
[Amit Varma]: is a collection of facts. So you know, is there a point at which the data journalist becomes a
[Amit Varma]: different sort of beast? Like, when did you start thinking of data is something special that kind of
[Amit Varma]: data consideration of data sets you apart from, you know, not from others, maybe, but maybe from
[Amit Varma]: the person you were previously? Like, what was the first TIL moment that you got from data?
[Guest]: So I think what happens and what sets things apart then and then what does create a unique
[Guest]: category is when you are able to independently come up with insights from numbers by yourself.
[Guest]: And this is important for a number of reasons for, you know, across journalism, the point is to be
[Guest]: able to move past the handout, the press release and be able to say something so that that means
[Guest]: that you develop a mastery of some sort, either you're able to, you know, understand what was
[Guest]: missed, you get to the spot and find what really happened, or you're able to get to multiple sources
[Guest]: who tell you what really happened, or you're able to look at numbers and say something entirely new,
[Guest]: that hasn't been told to you, and that hasn't been put out like that. So I think that came much
[Guest]: later, there was months and months, maybe even years, but months and months, definitely faithfully
[Guest]: reporting what the NSSO report was wanted to say, before getting to the point, you know, starting
[Guest]: from the point where I was able to say new things, to moving to the point where I was able to say
[Guest]: things that the press handout was very purposively not saying. So I think, you know, one of the
[Guest]: moments that it really struck home was, I want to say in 2015, the highly delayed
[Guest]: census religion data was finally put out by the new government. It was late, it had been expected
[Guest]: before the elections, but I suspect the UPA government just, you know, just out of like sort
[Guest]: of lily-livered nervousness sat on it, for no particular reason, maybe they just felt that this
[Guest]: was a conversation they did not want coming up at all, because of the sort of criticism that came
[Guest]: their way anyway. So the census organization in India comes under the Home Ministry, and for a lot
[Guest]: of important census releases, the Home Minister, Rajnath Singh at the time, or any Home Minister
[Guest]: in the past as well, would have a press conference, and the Census Commissioner would be there,
[Guest]: the Home Minister would be there, they would put it all out. The census data operation is truly,
[Guest]: uniquely opaque in a lot of ways. So a lot of the archival census data that I have is on CDs,
[Guest]: which I got from the census, when I used to report in Delhi, it's not available on their
[Guest]: website, and it's not easily available even in a book form. So what happened is that at 7pm
[Guest]: on a weeknight, the person who covered Home Ministry told me that they put out a press
[Guest]: release, and the press release says that now the proportion of Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, etc. in
[Guest]: India is this much, this much, this much. Hindus have grown at this rate, Muslims have grown at
[Guest]: that rate. And clearly, the growth rate of the population of Muslims was much higher than that
[Guest]: of Hindus. And that stood out in the second paragraph of the numbers, there was no context,
[Guest]: no background, no past numbers, nothing given. And that's it, that was 7 o'clock, and obviously
[Guest]: everybody had to run with the story. So I think what happened that day is, A, because I had been
[Guest]: by then at The Hindu for a couple of years as a journalist whose job was to look at numbers and
[Guest]: data specifically, it was part of my job, you know, I took it very seriously as part of my job
[Guest]: to create these archives of data for myself. So I had extensive past data, even though it wasn't
[Guest]: available from the census's website by then. And to create, as for all journalism, a phone book of
[Guest]: people who I could call upon to interpret data at any hour. So what we were able to do is that
[Guest]: we were able to look at the proportion of people by religious group from pre-independence time
[Guest]: onwards. And what that showed and what was confirmed by the demographers I spoke to was that
[Guest]: the Muslim population growth rate was expected to slow as Muslim women got better educated and
[Guest]: with better access to health and as Muslim incomes rose. What had happened actually between 2001 and
[Guest]: 11 is that the Muslim growth rate had slowed quicker than the Hindu growth rate even, and
[Guest]: quicker than expected. None of this meant that, you know, the Muslim population was
[Guest]: had shrunk or any of the, it was a nuanced sort of change. But to me, the reason that this was
[Guest]: the news was not just out of some sort of, you know, liberal belief. It's also that the fact
[Guest]: that Muslims are growing faster than Hindus has been unchanged since like 1930. So I didn't
[Guest]: understand how that could be a news point in 2015. If there's a change in the speed of growth,
[Guest]: that's what demographic transitions are all about. And that's what the story needed to be.
[Guest]: So every single newspaper the next day reported that Hindus now below 80%. I mean, as of 80% is
[Guest]: some scientific number. It was quite immaterial, but I, you know, that was the easy number to pick
[Guest]: up from the first few lines of the press release. And our very Hindu headline at the time said,
[Guest]: you know, Muslim population growth slows. And it sounded like literally the opposite of what
[Guest]: everybody else was saying. It created a big issue on social media. I was actually, you know,
[Guest]: stopped and even the Hindus always and asked by people in HR and finance, why is our paper saying
[Guest]: the opposite of what even the Tamil newspapers that they were reading or any of the other
[Guest]: more southern focused newspapers that they were reading were saying? I think that was one of the
[Guest]: moments that I felt that there was value in this as a specialization and it not being left to the
[Guest]: poor, overburdened and under equipped home ministry reporter to have to come up with the
[Guest]: best possible news report around it that she could at 7pm and then be criticized the next day
[Guest]: for feeding into propaganda or a narrative when she had just not been given the tools that she
[Guest]: would need to be able to say something more. So I'm not sure I answered your question.
[Amit Varma]: No, you did. You did. I mean, it's such a fantastic example of using data to go past
[Amit Varma]: the intuitive conclusion that one might draw and go a little deeper and find that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: the truth is exactly the opposite. And obviously, your Hindu headline wasn't in any way contradictory
[Amit Varma]: of what the others are saying. It's just that is going deeper and kind of giving more perspective.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of questions kind of arise from this, like as this very example shows, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: that you can always present the data or interpret the data to fit your own biases.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we live in times where it seems that narratives are more important than facts or
[Amit Varma]: than truth, you know, where possibly enabled by social media and the way WhatsApp and all
[Amit Varma]: has been weaponized. People choose narratives to choose whatever facts fit those narratives.
[Amit Varma]: And that's basically it. And, you know, whatever ways data is presented in goes through that
[Amit Varma]: narrative and they ignore everything else. So a couple of questions here. One is that
[Amit Varma]: even at a personal level, every time you choose a story to do, and in the case of a data journalist,
[Amit Varma]: every time you choose what analysis to run on a particular piece of data or what further
[Amit Varma]: inquiries to make, your own biases do come into play because we're all biased as individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And good journalists obviously are aware of those biases and they just try to do the most
[Amit Varma]: fair job that they can in terms of negotiating with facts. So part one, I'll come to part two
[Amit Varma]: later. But part one of my question would be that then do you is that something that you've had to
[Amit Varma]: watch out for where you sometimes have to take a step back from yourself and say that, OK,
[Amit Varma]: this might be the way I am approaching it. But let me just, you know, take a step out of that.
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that completely taking a step out of that is kind of impossible? This this is
[Guest]: something I spend so much time thinking about. And when I was listening to Samant on your podcast
[Guest]: and, you know, you were talking about subjectivity and bias. And I think someone said that,
[Guest]: you know, what's important is being fair, going in with fairness and, you know, subjectivity,
[Guest]: bias, all of these are things that exist in all humans. And I sort of kept that, you know,
[Guest]: part of my head to when I try to answer these questions for myself as well, that what am I
[Guest]: aiming for? What what do I think I'm going in with? What am I as a human able to do and what
[Guest]: should I aspire to? So I would agree that fairness is one of the things that I aspire to.
[Guest]: There is no doubt that particularly now that I'm in a position to choose the stories I do
[Guest]: much more than and I'm assigned stories much less. There is absolutely a few things that I
[Guest]: go into the data looking for and specifically report on. So I go into most data sets looking
[Guest]: for gender and caste dimensions because these are things of interest to me and what I'm most keen
[Guest]: on reporting on. Again, this sort of harks back to the quaint UPA era. It's hard to believe then,
[Guest]: but one of the biggest cleavages then was between the centre left and the left of the left. It's so
[Guest]: hard to imagine that that was the key cleavage then. But I remember, you know, I don't want to
[Guest]: date it too specifically because I don't want to talk about who this was, but someone who
[Guest]: assigned, you used to assign me stories at one point when I was reporting on the census.
[Guest]: And you know, this was information on asset ownership by household. And he very clearly
[Guest]: told me, I said, you know, I was, it was very early, so I was just not sure what part to look
[Guest]: at. And he said, see, don't tell me the things that have got better. And that was one of the
[Guest]: defining features of how we all, of how the UPA was covered, which is that these, you know,
[Guest]: neoliberal, like following market forces sort of things, turning their backs on the PDS. And,
[Guest]: you know, everybody's trying to say liberalisation has been great. But look, after 10 years of UPA,
[Guest]: people are so poor still. And, you know, asset ownership, only so many people have a cell phone
[Guest]: and have a toilet and that. And, you know, of course, one of the things to, for everybody to
[Guest]: think about is the enormous damage that this sort of discussion created even to the overall
[Guest]: political space, to the, to possibly even to electoral outcomes. I mean, that's obviously
[Guest]: not what that election was fought or won on. But it's really something to think about how
[Guest]: dangerous and damaging that was, particularly because it was not in any way borne out by the
[Guest]: data. 2005 to 2015 was the period of the fastest reduction in poverty in Indian history. And
[Guest]: it's, some of it we didn't know then, but some of it should have been obvious and was absolutely
[Guest]: not the story of that election. So, you know, we were talking earlier as well about what I studied
[Guest]: or what I studied and then the questions that I had to ask myself. Having studied and sort of
[Guest]: come up in a, you know, vaguely leftish atmosphere, one of the things that I did have to sort of
[Guest]: think hard and confront and worry about whether I was trying to sort of torture the data into
[Guest]: constantly confessing that some of these leftist truths hold true, which is that liberalisation was
[Guest]: bad, which is that, you know, migration is happening at a mass and dangerously terrifying scale,
[Guest]: showing mass impoverishment of the poorest of the poor from the villages, all of these things that
[Guest]: are not borne out by the data. That was a particularly damaging time for that sort of
[Guest]: journalism. There's other kind of falsehoods that are happening now. And we, you know, we all know
[Guest]: about them and focus on them and criticise them. But it's important to think of how damaging these,
[Guest]: this sort of now what looks like a micro-polarisation, but that was a polarisation
[Guest]: that existed in an ideological divide that existed then. The shoddy and sometimes downright
[Guest]: dishonest journalism that happened around that then is also pretty shameful.
[Amit Varma]: And it's pretty telling to me, like you pointed out, when you sort of found that sort of nuance
[Amit Varma]: in that headline that you ran in the Hindu, and you said that you were actually accosted in the
[Amit Varma]: corridor by people wanting to know and all of that, that also tells you a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: the desire to believe certain narratives and the pressure to conform to them and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And my sort of follow up question from there is that, you know, does, I mean, it's a two part
[Amit Varma]: question, part one, and I don't want to be too cynical about it. But does journalism of this
[Amit Varma]: sort, rigorous database journalism that is going that one or two steps deeper,
[Amit Varma]: does it really make a difference? Is there an appetite and a longing for it? And part two of
[Amit Varma]: that would be that, assuming that the answer is no, or that it is not enough to, you know, validate
[Amit Varma]: what we do on a daily basis, is it still almost a moral imperative for us to continue doing this
[Amit Varma]: kind of work so that there is a record for the future, like in a sense, like you've pointed out
[Amit Varma]: earlier that, you know, in a sense, you're probably one of the pioneers of data journalism in India,
[Amit Varma]: right? So you had to do all the manual work of going through hundreds of court judgments and all
[Amit Varma]: that. But now everybody who works in data, who works in data journalism, is, in a sense, creating
[Amit Varma]: a repository for their future selves, and future data journalists. So is that something that you
[Amit Varma]: take seriously? And are you more hopeful about, you know, your journalism, having an impact in
[Amit Varma]: these current times? And you know, I seem to be from my question. Yeah, so this is something that
[Guest]: I've usually been on the most cynical side of, which is that I feel like, that just as it is
[Guest]: very difficult for news to penetrate bubbles, I feel I don't think that data journalism
[Guest]: is in any way an exception to that. And now there's quite a range of, you know,
[Guest]: ideologically tinted data journalism, quote unquote, available as well. If you want to share it on a
[Guest]: WhatsApp group, you can find, you know, something that argues that the GDP is in great health,
[Guest]: you'll find something written somewhere about it. So I've usually tended to, to not feel that I'm
[Guest]: changing minds, that that's, that's not what's happening. I feel like I'm being, you know,
[Guest]: maybe uncovering truths for people who want to read it, but not necessarily changing minds.
[Guest]: But the more I think about it, the space, the position and the context of the people
[Guest]: matters a lot when it comes to mind changing. So I don't think that we change people's minds in
[Guest]: in terms of electoral outcomes, for example, you know, a lot of energy was invested,
[Guest]: and I don't think it was wrong, because it was something that the numbers showed
[Guest]: about the Gujarat model in 2014. So if data journalism worked, then data journalists
[Guest]: conclusively showed the problems of the Gujarat model in 2014, and that is absolutely nothing.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think it's crazy to think any journalism has electoral impacts. And that
[Guest]: includes data journalism as well. Similarly, I feel like people don't like being called out
[Guest]: and confronted on social media. And especially if they can find a large and noisy support group,
[Guest]: they'll they'll shout even louder to not hear what you're saying. But the quieter and more
[Guest]: intimate spaces are the ones in which I do feel that some of this percolates at some level. So,
[Guest]: and you know, maybe it doesn't for things that matter. Maybe it doesn't for politics, for example,
[Guest]: but I do think that things like, like, for example, demonetization, which, which in a way,
[Guest]: after the election was won, people didn't have to worry any more that accepting that demonetization
[Guest]: was a problem would derail the BJP's chances. Now they were not worried. Now the election had been
[Guest]: won for BJP supporters, for example. So, in a quieter, one on one, more intimate context,
[Guest]: I do feel that then people might consider the value of being shown or told numbers that don't
[Guest]: necessarily, that uncover a true truth for them as well. I'm not a confrontational person. And I
[Guest]: similarly feel this about the tone and the way in which these conversations need to
[Guest]: happen as well. So, if we're only going to think of this in terms of changing people's
[Guest]: minds in terms of party politics, then then we're not just going to feel cynical. It's just,
[Guest]: it's a lost cause. And if that is going to be the sort of igniting force for journalism,
[Guest]: then that's that's just a hopeless enterprise. But if it is to try and think at a more human,
[Guest]: human interaction level of this truly is what the numbers that I, in all fairness, have found,
[Guest]: I don't need to beat you over the head about them. I don't need to show you that you were
[Guest]: wrong to believe them. But here, here they are. And I don't feel like one needs to be very,
[Guest]: that this sort of kindness needs to be extended to people who are say, casteist or, you know,
[Guest]: anti-Muslim. It doesn't apply to all contexts. But when you are trying to change people's minds
[Guest]: about say, you know, poverty numbers or health numbers, that sort of stuff, I would like to
[Guest]: think that it gets somewhere. To think that it's going to make big societal changes. I don't see
[Guest]: evidence of that happening. And I don't I don't know if that is journalism's project at all.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually, you know, a fascinating note to continue on. But I mean, my aside there is that
[Amit Varma]: I think that writers and public intellectuals and journalists might sometimes overestimate their
[Amit Varma]: impact in the short run, but underestimate it in the long run. And I think therefore, what,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we have to keep doing is just keep banging on and just leave that historical record
[Amit Varma]: and just kind of make the task of those who come after us a little easier. You know, your last few
[Amit Varma]: words when you were speaking about journalism's project, what is journalism's project? Because
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, there is an idealistic view that and a view which is dear to me in certain ways
[Amit Varma]: that we must sort of kind of comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable as the cliche goes,
[Amit Varma]: and journalists have a duty to keep questioning whoever is in power and all of that and all that
[Amit Varma]: is fine. At the same time, there is another more pragmatic view that look at the end of the day,
[Amit Varma]: you have to think of the market and every company has to make a profit, and blah, blah, blah. And
[Amit Varma]: those are a different set of imperatives, which in some sense, are, you know, a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: or less, are amoral. And more and more, what we find in the present time is that one, there is a
[Amit Varma]: lot of journalism, which is going in one direction, which is saying that we will not question those
[Amit Varma]: in power, because that could, that could affect our bottom line in many different ways. And two,
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, we have people who should just be reporters, just focus on facts, just maintain
[Amit Varma]: the sort of balance between news and opinion, which once used to be sacrosanct, almost turning
[Amit Varma]: into sort of journalistic activists, in a sense. And of course, the finest journalists that I read
[Amit Varma]: do not do this at all. You know, their reporter speaks for themselves, people like you and Supriya
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, and so many fine people, one could go on and on. But at the same time, there is in other
[Amit Varma]: places, you see these little strains of sort of you can make out which side the journalist is on,
[Guest]: so to say. What is journalism's project according to you? I do, I do spend a lot of time thinking
[Guest]: about, you know, what do you call activists? I also try and think of it in terms of very, sort
[Guest]: of very sort of engaged and involved kind of journalism, you know. And I try to think about
[Guest]: why I have such discomfort with it, and whether if I wasn't wrapped in all the privilege that I am,
[Guest]: I, maybe I too would be, would feel the need to be much more involved and angry about the things
[Guest]: that I was talking about. I don't think journalism's project is unchanged. And I don't,
[Guest]: you know, neither the political environment nor the financial environment, for me, changes
[Guest]: that key project of beginning by questioning, holding those in power accountable, speaking
[Guest]: truth to power, bringing forth the things that those in power seek to hide, you know, adding
[Guest]: weight and courage to the people who are trying to talk about things that are being hidden,
[Guest]: but also in bringing out just the, you know, how in news stories, people never sound like
[Guest]: actual humans. They sound like either archetypes, or they sound like some sort of quote,
[Guest]: bot, or nobody sounds like an actual human in a news story. So, part of journalism's project
[Guest]: should also be the feeling of encountering people. And that happens not at all, because
[Guest]: the most engaged and involved people aren't unafflicted by this. They too are reporting in
[Guest]: a way, talking to people in a way to push, you know, to make their own point admirable,
[Guest]: though it may be forcefully, but without allowing people to be anything more than what that quote
[Guest]: needs to be. So, I mean, I wish journalism project was a little more of all of that as well.
[Guest]: You know, the joy that should be coming from it doesn't need to come from writing about purely
[Guest]: joyful things. But that element of getting a window into just some, like a moment of humanity
[Guest]: that doesn't necessarily need to be either bringing you to tears, or, you know, producing
[Guest]: great, or, I haven't read a lot of Hindi books, but my extremely boring middle of the road, most,
[Guest]: most favorite book is Raag Darbari. And I want more of Raag Darbari in journalism,
[Guest]: not purely because you know, of all the ironies and all that it exposed, but also because
[Guest]: nobody can tell you the plot of Raag Darbari. It is, it's a meandering journey of all sorts
[Guest]: of human experience. And obviously, that cannot be what every news story does. But I wish there
[Guest]: was more of that a bit of whimsy, a bit of, you know, people allowed to be a little more
[Guest]: than what journalism's project requires them to be. Because there's no way to feel empathy
[Guest]: or to feel, to see people as anything beyond the categories that journalists have decided
[Guest]: they fit in. If we, if we don't report with, with anything beyond, you know, all of the while,
[Guest]: all of my time in newsrooms, I never wrote more than 350 words per piece. And what that meant
[Guest]: is that I had learned to switch off people so fast. I didn't want to know much more about them
[Guest]: because there was nothing I could do with it. And one of the things that I would really, you know,
[Guest]: want, even if you aren't in an organization, young journalists aren't in an organization that
[Guest]: requires them to also take videos or whatever, I wish people would record people at length,
[Guest]: and not just keep it, you know, make something out of it, even if it's just for your family to
[Guest]: listen to, but like, a long podcast of your conversation with someone who just made it to
[Guest]: just made it to one single quote in your new story will, will lead you to, even if you're
[Guest]: not able to write a Raag Dharbari into your news reporting, at least there's a Raag Dharbari in
[Guest]: your mind, you know, your experiences are at least adding up to that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and I've just discovered that besides podcasts and Ferguson, we have a third thing in
[Amit Varma]: common, which is our love for Raag Dharbari, which is, like you said, you can't describe it,
[Amit Varma]: it's just such an incredible, capacious book, it contains so much, it's beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you were speaking with a long podcast. And, you know, that's one of
[Amit Varma]: my personal frustrations that I'll read a great piece of journalism, and I'll
[Amit Varma]: see these quotes in it. And I'll be like, shit that, you know, I wish I could listen to the
[Amit Varma]: full thing. Like, I think some month during the conversation, I don't know if it was on record, or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when the tapes weren't rolling, as it were mentioned how many hours of sort of interviews
[Amit Varma]: he has. And I'm like, I would like to listen to all of them. And similarly, while reading, you
[Amit Varma]: know, my last episode was with the artist and historian Anshul Malhotra on her, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the oral histories of partition, deeply moving book. And while reading that book, again, I wish
[Amit Varma]: that my God that imagine being able to listen to these conversations. My next question sort of is
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, that sort of what can often be a dichotomy, but should not be and the best
[Amit Varma]: writers combine it very well, like you do, which is the two conflicting impulses that one, you want
[Amit Varma]: the data to tell you the bigger story to give you the big picture. But at the same time, you want to
[Amit Varma]: make it relatable, and you want to make it real and human as it were, by actually sort of telling
[Amit Varma]: a story about it. And you know, and they can often sort of exist that sort of conflict where someone
[Amit Varma]: who doesn't look at the bigger picture at all might be simplifying or might be, you know, not
[Amit Varma]: getting anywhere close to the truth, while someone who is only focused on the big picture might be
[Amit Varma]: able to communicate in abstract terms what the big picture is, but not make it so real and concrete
[Amit Varma]: that the reader can empathize with it. And you know, in a lot of your writing, you kind of marry
[Amit Varma]: these two, like, for example, I want to quote from this piece that you wrote in March, I think March
[Amit Varma]: 23, in Al Jazeera about migrant workers, where you wrote, you began the piece by saying, quote,
[Amit Varma]: on Saturday, the 50th day since India's first Coronavirus case was confirmed,
[Amit Varma]: Parma Bhandari called his family in Nepal to reassure them that he would be coming home.
[Amit Varma]: They were not all going to die without seeing each other, he told them, stop quote, which is such a
[Amit Varma]: lovely human beginning and immediately makes the reader interested. And then you there's a lot of
[Amit Varma]: data in the piece, but very relatable. And then towards the end, we have the line where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you quote his roommate, Padam Bhandari saying, quote, now there is no going back, whatever it
[Amit Varma]: is, we have to face it here, stop quote. And this is from an aspect that you discussed in, you know,
[Amit Varma]: episode five of the Moving Curve, your amazing podcast, which we go on to discuss. But here again,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that you've, you know, managed beautifully to marry the personal with the overarching, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what's happening in general. So is this something that you've thought about a lot that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how do we marry these two aspects? Does it sometimes become conflicting in some ways?
[Guest]: So it's actually one of the things that I don't feel that I do very well. It's partly on account
[Guest]: of circumstance and partly on account of having just not figured out yet, not being sure yet,
[Guest]: both in what I read and what I write, what, where I want, what I think the sweet spot is. So,
[Guest]: you know, when I think about what should be ideal journalism, or what should be the ideal
[Guest]: journalism that I'm doing, I would usually want to say to myself, I should be doing more travel,
[Guest]: I should be going out and meeting more people. But partly, as you know, on account of the
[Guest]: circumstances of my life right now, that's not, that's not something I do much now much, much
[Guest]: less than I did before I used to, I got the opportunity to really see a lot of the country
[Guest]: and learn a lot that way. So I don't think I do that. And I don't know how much more of it I want
[Guest]: in both what I read and what I write. So the example I was giving you earlier about Canary,
[Guest]: which is that it's a staggering piece of journalism, it's, you know, model for looking
[Guest]: into corroboration of accusations. So I suppose if I, you know, the reporter should feel,
[Guest]: the journalist should feel very proud of, of all of that, the humanising, the larger story,
[Guest]: the narrative, all of that. But then, as I told you, I felt it fell deeply short on the
[Guest]: data part of it, that was a necessary link, I think, to make the point that it sought to be
[Guest]: making. So, you know, I should have felt that that that story was a triumph, but I didn't
[Guest]: ultimately feel that. And then would I have been happier with not a seven part podcast, but a one,
[Guest]: one, you know, 2000 word Washington Post piece that did actually manage to get at the heart of
[Guest]: the judge's record, and then mention the allegations as well? Perhaps that's what I,
[Guest]: you know, I'm looking more for. The trouble is that I find it very hard to think of examples of
[Guest]: news reports where I felt that, you know, the narrative and the elements of storytelling that
[Guest]: it brought to it, brought in something to the news story, to the story that, to me,
[Guest]: would have otherwise, you know, I would have otherwise felt that it didn't give me what I
[Guest]: wanted from it. I'm well aware that I have a much more involved way of looking at data stories. And
[Guest]: it's probably, so one of the things I wanted to mention earlier to which I forgot, which is that
[Guest]: the way maths is taught in this country is such a disgrace on the whole,
[Guest]: mainly because it makes people feel that they can't do it for very unfair and often discriminatory
[Guest]: reasons. And I feel very bad when I occasionally take data journalism courses to see very bright
[Guest]: people completely freeze at, you know, very simple numbers, 20 year olds who get absolutely
[Guest]: frightened by simple percentage or subtraction. And I, you know, imagine that people who have
[Guest]: been taught maths similarly feel the same when they see a data story. So, you know, that's the
[Guest]: last sort of thing that I would be, that I want readers to feel. So maybe, maybe more of this
[Guest]: is important to not make, I don't want readers to ever have to feel that here's someone saying
[Guest]: something very smart. And because I am, I don't understand numbers, I'm not smart enough. And
[Guest]: that's why I haven't understood what they're saying. So, you know, maybe sacrificing some of
[Guest]: the charts and the numbers to be able to tell the story better would not alienate people who have
[Guest]: not been, just not had the opportunity to study math or logic in a way that would help them.
[Guest]: Because having not been trained in statistics myself, the level of statistical analysis I do
[Guest]: is extremely basic. And in a way, you know, that holds me back from being able to do more ambitious
[Guest]: stuff, but I would hope that it makes it more accessible to readers who are more likely to be
[Guest]: at my level than at, you know, regression analysis level. Sorry, I got a bit lost over there.
[Amit Varma]: No, all of it made sense. And all of it sort of spoke to my question about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the trade off between narrative and data, the big picture in the concrete.
[Guest]: Yeah. So occasionally I see people who do it wonderfully. I was reading recently a
[Guest]: ProPublica investigation into Chicago's first hundred COVID deaths. And here there was original
[Guest]: data journalism because there had been no analysis yet by, you know, either the local administration
[Guest]: or the government. So this is something that journalism needed to do, because I think they
[Guest]: found something like 70 out of the hundred deaths were African-Americans. So that was
[Guest]: an important thing to get to quickly because that was still at a stage at which, you know,
[Guest]: the medical fraternity could rejig and rethink. And it begins with a very moving story as well.
[Guest]: And what I liked is what it, you know, centered on the point that African-Americans are much more
[Guest]: likely to have what are known as comorbidities for COVID, but that doesn't make these deaths
[Guest]: inevitable. And just sometimes you read a line and you're just like, why was I thinking,
[Guest]: this is what I was thinking. Someone has called me out. You know, making morbidity sound like
[Guest]: inevitability is something I was doing. And I read that one line and it just made me feel like,
[Guest]: OK, this is something I should keep in mind when I'm reporting about Indian COVID numbers as well.
[Guest]: So that was, you know, to me, one of those examples of really being drawn in by the narrative
[Guest]: and then being kept there by the original, truly original data work over there. But
[Guest]: yeah, I suppose this is where knowing your audience becomes important. And I don't know
[Guest]: my audience at all. So knowing how much more storytelling my audience would like is a vague
[Guest]: sort of guess that I make. Like at The Hindu, for example, there were a lot of young students
[Guest]: who read the newspaper and I know that they were really hungry for information. So I did want to
[Guest]: speak to them very much. I love that audience. And I think they were OK with not having the
[Guest]: storytelling elements. They really wanted to get to the meat of it. So I don't know,
[Guest]: maybe I hope at some point I can figure out what my audience wants.
[Amit Varma]: There's something you said earlier, which I think is profoundly important and I feel
[Amit Varma]: strongly about it. So I'll kind of underscore that, which is, you know, when you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that people who may not have studied math very well and they might come across a story they don't
[Amit Varma]: really understand and they feel that, oh, am I the stupid one here? And, you know, I sort of teach
[Amit Varma]: this online writing course where I constantly tell them that, look, if your reader doesn't
[Amit Varma]: understand something, it's not their fault, it's your fault. You know, and I think that's true of
[Amit Varma]: journalists as well, that, you know, do not condescend to your readers. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if any reader doesn't understand something, you have messed up. That person is not stupid.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that, you know, that basic level of respect for the reader is not something that
[Amit Varma]: writers are mindful of. And now if we get into these reflexive habits of using jargon and opaque
[Amit Varma]: prose and all of that, and we're not really thinking about sort of the reader's experience.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and I guess for a data journalist that there must also be that tussle, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because in the sense that you don't want to dumb anything down, you want to say what you have to
[Amit Varma]: say, but at the same time, you have a lot of complex things you want to say, you want it to
[Amit Varma]: be understood. Is that sort of a tussle that you faced internally? So, I think what's very useful
[Guest]: for me here is not having statistical skills myself. So, there isn't very far that I can go
[Guest]: with it myself. So, I do think that that helps keep all of what I write at a level that's,
[Guest]: you know, going to be manageable for the lay reader and probably too little for,
[Guest]: say, many mid-readers who would be able to understand much more complex statistical
[Guest]: concepts that I'm not actually familiar with. I think a lot of data journalism is trying to
[Guest]: figure out where to stand on this. And you realize immediately when someone is being,
[Guest]: is showboating. It's profoundly annoying to see in data journalism. It's, you know,
[Guest]: not necessary in the least. And I suppose part of growing up is realizing how annoying
[Guest]: FiveThirtyEight and Nate Silver are. You go into data journalism thinking,
[Guest]: oh, this is what it's supposed to be like. Oh, my God, I can't believe I discovered Excel
[Guest]: yesterday. And then after a few months of it, I'm so pleased I can't do anything beyond
[Guest]: addition and subtraction on Excel, because if I'm going to start sounding like this,
[Guest]: I mean, it has its own readership. It would be ridiculous for me to have a value judgment on
[Guest]: something that is so, does so well, is so successful. But I can't stand to read most
[Guest]: of it. I can't stand the tone. I can't stand the place at which it sits. And in Indian journalism,
[Guest]: occasionally there's some of that, very rarely. The other thing that tends to happen now is that
[Guest]: there's a great confusion between data visualization and data journalism.
[Guest]: So what you'll occasionally see are wildly indulgent and extremely expensive data
[Guest]: visualization efforts that involve very little journalism, actually. So that's another,
[Guest]: that's another sort of, you know, someone with mad skills, who has been given a long rope by
[Guest]: an editor, you can see that happening. And you can see, you can see a big budget being,
[Guest]: being burned, sometimes for pretty, for a pretty modest outcome.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that's a natural journey for, you know, young people to make when they come into
[Amit Varma]: the profession. Like I remember when I was a young writer, I also like to showboat in my writing,
[Amit Varma]: right? So has a fancy phrase and all that. And it's as you go along that journey that you realize,
[Amit Varma]: as the saying goes, that you have to kill your darlings, and you have to put the reader up front,
[Amit Varma]: it's not about showing how smart you are. And I guess data journalists make the same question.
[Amit Varma]: My next question sort of harks back to something we were discussing earlier about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that as you kind of started, you know, discovering the uses of data and what it can be for your frame
[Amit Varma]: also subtly shifts in the way you kind of, you know, look at things shifts. Now, I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that I mean, one, would you agree that at some level, every journalist needs to be a data
[Amit Varma]: journalist, not in the sense of knowing all the tech and doing all the Excel and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: but just in terms of understanding the bigger picture, through numbers and all of that. So
[Amit Varma]: that's part one of the question. And, and part two, then is that, you know, in all your years
[Amit Varma]: of experience, where you've both reported and looked at data and all of that, you know, can you,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, simply put, what about India do journalists not understand that they would,
[Guest]: if they had an adequate understanding of data? Okay, um, let me get to the first one. And then
[Guest]: let me slowly let the second one marinate in my brain. I'd say that a lot of what I did for the
[Guest]: first few years of what I looked at as a data journalism specific job is actually what all
[Guest]: journalists should be doing. It was not specialized at all. And anyone with, you know, for Saturday's
[Guest]: training should be able to do that stuff. And absolutely, all journalists should be able to
[Guest]: incorporate a certain amount of data into all the news reporting. This applies deeply to political
[Guest]: journalists, it applies, you know, very deeply to crime reporters about, and I have some, you know,
[Guest]: very strong feelings about crime reporting in this country, which I think is a, is an absolute,
[Guest]: it's truly dangerous and destructive, not just about the people who, you know, are reported on,
[Guest]: it's just that so much of our understanding of the country about crime, about, you know,
[Guest]: relationships, about so much of everything is colored by the fact that a large part of
[Guest]: crime reporting in this country is a crime reporter uncritically reproducing an FIR as fact.
[Guest]: And an FIR is not fact. An FIR is one person's attempt at storytelling mediated by a deeply
[Guest]: involved and deeply problematic police system. And that's the basis on which we form so much of our
[Guest]: understanding of this country. It really worries me. And there's not been any reckoning around
[Guest]: crime reporting at all in this country, despite so much momentous stuff around crime having
[Guest]: happened in the last seven, eight years. So yes, I really don't know why Moon Newsroom don't do
[Guest]: this. It's really quite, it's relatively cheap. It's easy to do now. Everyone has a data journalist
[Guest]: on their rolls anyway, to just give reporters the training themselves. Again, a lot of news
[Guest]: reporters would be afraid of numbers. So, you know, maybe it's harder to get through on that.
[Guest]: Even working in teams is so rare between data journalists and other journalists. So yes,
[Guest]: absolutely. I mean, hopefully we'll reach a point where desks start returning reports,
[Guest]: news reports that don't have any sort of references to data or research to substantiate
[Guest]: at least the key point that the article is making, or at least the fact, you know, just as you need
[Guest]: to be able to tell your editor who your anonymous source is most of the time and why you've not
[Guest]: quoted them, you should be able to at least assure your editor that the arguments that
[Guest]: your anecdotes are making are sort of supported by what research says. And you know, that should
[Guest]: be a sort of line that you need to benchmark that you need to achieve for a story to go forward.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think it's really inexpensive. And I hope more energy is put into that. And the other
[Guest]: thing is, you know, most journalists, especially younger journalists, and especially in non
[Guest]: glamorous beats, are so under trained, under resourced, under focused on, you know,
[Guest]: they deserve it, they deserve being given these skills. And frequently, you know, I get other
[Guest]: people getting in touch with me and from non English media, where really, I feel like the
[Guest]: hunger and the desire to have data journalistic stories in the paper is so enormous, and such an
[Guest]: unmet need that nobody is able to still fill this gap at all. So I wrote for a while for,
[Guest]: I mean, I say I wrote, but I wrote for a while for Denik Bhaskar. And I just,
[Guest]: they just said, just write in English, and we will translate it and carry it because,
[Guest]: you know, just be mindful of roughly who our audience is. So you know, they don't write
[Guest]: completely sort of a Tamil Nadu, Kerala story. But yeah, I mean, the problem is that most non
[Guest]: English media can't pay very well. So that's immediately a problem. But yes, I wish all
[Guest]: journalists could get some of these resources and all non English media in particular could be given
[Amit Varma]: some of these resources. What is the second thing? Yeah, my second thing, I mean, before we get to
[Amit Varma]: that first, I guess, you know, the Arushi Talwar case, or the way the SSR in Braglio was reported
[Amit Varma]: would be prime examples of, you know, how horrendous the crime reporting in our countries
[Amit Varma]: is it partly because, I mean, do we take shortcuts, because we are also understaffed in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people except in places like caravan and so on, people don't really get 10 days to
[Amit Varma]: work on one story. And, you know, let the let it marinate talk to 15 sources. Instead, everything
[Amit Varma]: is like, okay, where's your story for the day? And, and therefore, you take these shortcuts. And
[Guest]: that's just how the system works. Yeah, there is that. But I mean, that's a feature of it. And
[Guest]: that's not, you know, an entirely all encompassing explanation as such. So in Mumbai, for example,
[Guest]: where just as in Delhi, the crime reporting is an extremely competitive beat over there,
[Guest]: a crime reporter would easily have five, six stories available to file every day. So,
[Guest]: you know, they're not short on the stories to file, they don't necessarily need to file all
[Guest]: of them, they have enough stuff always. No, it's just that we've made this, and editors know this
[Guest]: very well, because, you know, most editors are very friendly with senior police as well.
[Guest]: We've just made this an acceptable form of journalism. Most beginning crime reporters, your job is to go hang around the police station and then faithfully report
[Guest]: whatever the key FIRs of that day are. We haven't gone into it. You know, asking someone to take
[Guest]: 10 days and corroborate from multiple places is another thing. We haven't even said get,
[Guest]: if you're reporting on an FIR, speak to the complainant. We haven't even started from there.
[Guest]: Let the accused person get their side of it. We've made it an acceptable practice for just the FIR to
[Guest]: become a statement of fact. So, yeah, in the high profile ones, we saw that, but you know,
[Guest]: when I was at the Times of India in Mumbai, there was a shift thing that used to come to us every
[Guest]: few weeks, which is that you would have to be the day shift reporter or the night shift reporter,
[Guest]: no matter what your regular beat was, you'd have to do it in rotation every few weeks, which is
[Guest]: your job would be to, basically in Mumbai, if a building fell down, you'd have to go and cover it
[Guest]: because you know, that happens all the time. So who are you going to assign? You can't have a
[Guest]: building falling down reporter. You need to assign someone who's just free to do the running around
[Guest]: for the day. And your job was to call key police stations every few hours and check what's
[Guest]: happening. The fire department, you know, in no way have we made it, you know, when I used to see
[Guest]: when I used to see those briefs that would come in from the cops also, there was just stuff that
[Guest]: was clearly an issue, or you could see that it was a script because you'd, this is one of the
[Guest]: things I find a lot in even in reporting on court judgments is that cops in India follow a script
[Guest]: so regularly about for a particular IPC section. So, for example, on suicides in Mumbai, I remember
[Guest]: on this press notes, they would regularly say, Azarpanala Kantaloon, which is tired of his
[Guest]: illness. And you'd immediately think, wow, you know, I'm sure there's more to it, maybe the
[Guest]: person couldn't pay for it, or, you know, Kantaloon means almost like a board of something.
[Guest]: And so what was it? Was it was it? What illness was this? Was it TB? Are people still having to
[Guest]: kill themselves? You know, as people still being driven to suicide by TB? Was it what illnesses
[Guest]: are bankrupting people? There's so much more that needed to come out of that. But, you know, yeah,
[Guest]: that that's how it was reported by the cops and then duly and faithfully reported by crime
[Guest]: reporters as well. Even the the sexual assault investigation that I ended up doing in Delhi's
[Guest]: district courts came out of regular reading in the newspapers in the days after the 2012
[Guest]: Delhi rape. Regularly reading, a girl was kidnapped in a busy market and given a sedative-laced
[Guest]: cold drink. And I started seeing this so often, or pulled into a moving car. I started seeing this
[Guest]: so often, I really started wondering about this sedative-laced cold drink. Like, is it an issue?
[Guest]: Should we now be careful that, you know, there's some sort of adulteration and cold drinks going
[Guest]: on? And this moving car business at that time, you know, I lived with flatmates in Delhi. It
[Guest]: used to terrify my mother to think that there are these moving cars just constantly pulling people
[Guest]: and girls into cars. So that's what, I mean, looking into it came as a result of me myself
[Guest]: making my own assessments about Delhi and my own safety from newspaper articles that were essentially
[Guest]: faithfully reproducing FIRs. That, it turned out, had much more to do with parental criminalization
[Guest]: of consensual, often inter-religious and inter-caste relationships than anything else.
[Guest]: And it was such a fundamental disservice to everything, to the city itself, that this kind
[Guest]: of reporting was forming the basis of our judgments about everything. I mean, I felt that maybe I
[Guest]: felt that maybe I shouldn't be going out that much. Maybe I shouldn't be living in Delhi anymore.
[Guest]: That's what started me looking at it and reporting on it at all.
[Amit Varma]: So they weren't moving cars. So this was basically parents are pissed off that their daughter is
[Amit Varma]: going in for an inter-religious or whatever, and then they file a case and then the FIR has
[Amit Varma]: moving car. Wow, that's incredible. Okay, so my larger...
[Guest]: The sedative-laced cold drink was usually the hallmark of that because you needed to say
[Guest]: how this boy was able to kidnap her from a crowded market, there was a sedative-laced cold drink.
[Guest]: So that's where... And there was, I looked at 650 cases in all and I can't remember how many
[Guest]: had sedative-laced cold drinks in them. Many. No cop was able to produce a single cold drink
[Guest]: bottle in court, in even one. It was just complete fabrication from beginning to end,
[Guest]: that part. The cold drink part was a complete 100% fabrication in all of those. It was just,
[Guest]: I mean, the level of it was just appalling. I mean, it's pretty mind-blowing. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: imagine the first person to put that in an FIR, you know, at least there you got to give them
[Amit Varma]: some credit for imagination and, you know, becomes a meme. So perhaps must have been
[Amit Varma]: some Tamilian gentleman who made it a meme and, you know, as you point out their talent for that.
[Amit Varma]: So the larger question, which actually I want to make even larger and I want to kind of take
[Amit Varma]: data out of it because, you know, you've been a journalist for so long and have seen the whole
[Amit Varma]: industry so intimately. And my question simply is this, what about India do journalists not
[Guest]: understand? So my favorite way to think about this is through elections. I love elections,
[Guest]: I love opinion polling around it, I love the news reporting around it, even though it drives me
[Guest]: crazy. And at least, you know, when I think about elections, the thing that journalists do not get
[Guest]: is that the motivations that people believe drive them are often not the motivations that
[Guest]: truly drive them. They are not trying to lie or obfuscate at all. It's just that
[Guest]: most people, especially upper-caste people, do not get how central self-respect is to Indians.
[Guest]: I think this has come home to me more and more in Tamil Nadu, but what's come home to me is not
[Guest]: how much Tamils value self-respect, which they do, and which has, you know, a rich political
[Guest]: history here, but it's also brought home to me the fact that so much of what I was seeing in
[Guest]: the country was an expression of self-respect. Shankar, my boss at the Times of India,
[Guest]: always told me that he felt that every election was, and every campaign, every political party,
[Guest]: was about ideas. No matter how these narratives get set about this is an election of this,
[Guest]: this is an election of rejection of that, they are very much about ideas. And now there's strong
[Guest]: evidence for this. Rahul Rahman, Pradeep Chhabra have a superb book on ideology in Indian politics,
[Guest]: and it's exactly, in a sense, what Shankar had felt about elections, which is that Indians are
[Guest]: deeply ideological, most of them, and these are ideologically coherent positions, they change
[Guest]: very little over time, and these positions are getting stronger. So, I don't think people realize
[Guest]: how much ideas and ideology matter to people, and this is not just in elections now, I want to say.
[Guest]: This applies, I feel this even when people talk about finance and about, well, household finance
[Guest]: and poverty, which is failing to understand the motivations for why people spend money on the
[Guest]: things they do is also a big issue with how people fail to understand so much of the economy.
[Guest]: You know, feeling that, when people talk about spending on marriages as a social evil,
[Guest]: and then, you know, so all of this comes down to pride, self-respect, and the power of ideas.
[Guest]: And it doesn't take more than 10 minutes of involved talking to anybody, to be, to anybody,
[Guest]: to any Indian, to be so struck by, to feel so struck by how deeply they hold ideas. And it's
[Guest]: just that, just as you and I, you know, anyone who tries to talk to us in an involved way will
[Guest]: feel our passion for our ideas quickly, it just takes that extra, it takes that belief that people
[Guest]: are more than what you've decided that they are. And so, in some ways, I'm glad that now I cover
[Guest]: elections largely through data, because there is no way I would be able to translate into words
[Guest]: how much of electoral motivation comes from, you know, the desire to be seen as a worthy human.
[Guest]: And this does explain a lot of why people vote along cast lines, and it's not for the reasons
[Guest]: that you, that usually get reported as well. It explains, you know, party commitments.
[Guest]: So yeah, you know, you'll always find this, right? And if you decide to engage in a conversation
[Guest]: with anyone, it's always exciting to discover someone's passion, right? You don't expect
[Guest]: that your Ola driver is deeply passionate about a movie star, or about, you know,
[Guest]: a singer. Sometimes I've been in cabs in Chennai and been so amazed by young boys
[Guest]: who are huge fans of some particular Hindi movie. And, you know, because they know that I'm not
[Guest]: speaking Tamil very well, they assume that I speak Hindi and, you know, want to know about
[Guest]: that movie or that particular singer. It's usually something that's been released in the last few
[Guest]: years, so I know nothing about it. But I love discovering people's passions in that way.
[Guest]: And this is what most journalists miss, that most Indians are people of ideas.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting. This reminded me of something corporate, in fact, where Zomato has
[Amit Varma]: started this recent thing where if a delivery boy is coming to your thing, they'll say, oh,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Ahmed is fond of conversation or whatever, they'll throw in a little telling
[Amit Varma]: detail. And I'm immediately getting my mic set up ready and saying, should I engage in a recorded
[Amit Varma]: conversation with Ahmed? But, you know, and this also goes back to, you know, what Stephen Covey
[Amit Varma]: once famously said about how we listen to respond and not to understand. And you would think that
[Amit Varma]: this would be such a simple thing that, you know, that we listen more, but listening is something
[Amit Varma]: that we're just so horrendously bad at. And I don't know if it's something to do with a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of insecurity that is also greater and perhaps Indians and in other places that we
[Amit Varma]: we're always so, you know, in need of that validation and showing that we are smarter
[Amit Varma]: than the other person. And we know more that we simply don't listen enough. And that's also
[Amit Varma]: something that, you know, I kind of find quite evocative. Let's take another commercial break
[Amit Varma]: then. And after that, when we come back, we shall finally, finally, dear listener, finally,
[Amit Varma]: get started talking about your wonderful podcast, A Moving Curve in COVID.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want to be
[Amit Varma]: surrounded by beauty and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition for you. Head on over
[Amit Varma]: to IndianColors.com. Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary
[Amit Varma]: artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches, and home
[Amit Varma]: decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at a fine art gallery.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices. And artists get
[Amit Varma]: royalties for every product you buy. Win-win game. The Indian Colors new range is in and includes
[Amit Varma]: elegant yet comfortable dresses for women and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by
[Amit Varma]: artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep
[Amit Varma]: Mehrotra. Stay home, but dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days,
[Amit Varma]: you can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors. Corporate
[Amit Varma]: gifting is also available. So head on over to IndianColors.com. There's colors with an OU
[Amit Varma]: and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen. That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting
[Amit Varma]: with Rukmini. Yes, remarkable data journalist, remarkable journalist period and also the podcaster
[Amit Varma]: of the Moving Curve. Tell me a little bit about what was the impetus behind starting this specific
[Amit Varma]: podcast? Like one of the things that I was struck by is that, you know, people often talk about
[Amit Varma]: journalism as the first draft of history. And what you know, the Moving Curve seemed to do to me
[Amit Varma]: since it was a daily podcast, and you know, it's not twice a week, is sort of actually almost
[Amit Varma]: document that in real time. And it was so fascinating to kind of binge through it. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, listen to the episodes, because one can see your sort of understanding also evolve
[Amit Varma]: and the kind of questions that you ask. And what made you think of starting it?
[Guest]: So I've always loved audio as a medium, without ever having done anything in it at all.
[Guest]: There was one point at which I sort of, I talked to someone about doing a podcast. And then
[Guest]: I realized I had such clear ideas of what I wanted it to be and sound like and, you know,
[Guest]: I didn't really, I don't think I was very receptive to suggestions. And then it just,
[Guest]: you know, fell by the wayside. I listened to I mean, I don't listen to a ton of podcasts,
[Guest]: but I do. I know I love it. I love it as a medium. The early days of the lockdown was so
[Guest]: was so strange, right? We were all in such all of us suspended in such strange positions,
[Guest]: you know, frozen and all sorts of unusual outposts that I don't know if in normal times,
[Guest]: I would have I would have done it. You know, it sort of felt like we were all on little boats
[Guest]: out into the sea. And it was okay to send out these mosquito messages to each other. And you
[Guest]: know, someone would listen to it and would feel nice hearing another sound. I would have felt
[Guest]: much more self conscious if I really felt like this was you know, if I thought of it as everybody
[Guest]: in their houses or their workplaces listening to it. So what was happening in the early days is
[Guest]: that we really were finding out everything about the virus so fast every day. And there was not
[Guest]: just news to catch up on. There was also research that I felt that I needed to read academic
[Guest]: research and understand it. And I felt like every day at the end of the day, there was something
[Guest]: that I was taking away from it. And I like the feeling of maybe just saying it out to myself
[Guest]: that this is what I felt that I had learned through the day. And just on a whim, I, you know,
[Guest]: I thought, okay, let me just use this as an opportunity to get this started. And again,
[Guest]: because I didn't think of it too much, I actually put it out because otherwise now I'm so scared of
[Guest]: making any sort of commitments because my time is so scattered right now, that if someone had
[Guest]: approached me and said, would you like to do 100 episode podcast around the pandemic, I would have,
[Guest]: you know, I would have cried with fright and said no before I could even before they could
[Guest]: have finished their question. I really like the fact that I did this entirely on my own terms.
[Guest]: And that's the only way I would have done it at all. Otherwise, I really would have felt too
[Guest]: scared to do it. And I don't feel you know, I should feel embarrassed by the fact that
[Guest]: some of it was so wrong and figuring so many things out that are probably wrong now,
[Guest]: but I don't I don't really and it is from the sort of impulse that you're describing as,
[Guest]: you know, first draft of history, which is, I feel like this is that hopefully, that was an example
[Guest]: of fairness that all I felt that I was going in was with a questioning mind and seeing what my
[Guest]: questions were producing and then fairly reproducing that without, without making up my mind too
[Guest]: strongly, you know, more strongly than what the evidence was showing, at least. I hadn't even
[Guest]: thought at the time that I was going to have guests on it, because all of that would have felt
[Guest]: like such a grandiose and pompous thing to do for just something that I was trying out for a few
[Guest]: people who want to listen to, who might want to listen to it. But immediately, I mean, just a few
[Guest]: days in, I realized that I had questions that actually someone needed to answer that, you know,
[Guest]: the information wasn't really available. And this is the part that's been really amazing to me. So
[Guest]: people I already know, I'm of course, thankful that they come on this. But people in government
[Guest]: or people, similarly sort of experts who I haven't spoken to before, because I don't cover science or
[Guest]: even health that much, them agreeing to speak to me and come on this is the truly unusual part. And I
[Guest]: suppose that's what demonstrates true commitment to science, that if somebody wants to know the
[Guest]: science of it, you're committed enough to go and talk to them about it. And the other thing that
[Guest]: always felt intimidating to me is because I'm truly very, you know, totally the opposite of
[Guest]: being tech savvy. I wouldn't have known how to do any of it, you know, but this is where
[Guest]: friends just have done things for me. And that's been great. So Anand Krishnamurthy, who does the
[Guest]: sound for it, is a very well known, well regarded person in audio. And it's, you know, I'm just,
[Guest]: he's a friend, and I'm hugely thankful that he's just doing this for me, because he too likes
[Guest]: podcasts, and, you know, is interested in this, and of course, is doing it to help me out. So
[Guest]: because of him, I even, I even knew that, okay, then now I have a sound file, then I have to put
[Guest]: it out somewhere. Then another friend did the RSS feed part for me, which I truly know nothing about
[Guest]: even now, he did it. Another friend did the artwork for free, because at some point, someone
[Guest]: said, put it on Apple podcast. Oh, God, how do I do that? And then Apple podcast said original artwork.
[Guest]: And then me, like a complete dimwit, instead of just throwing together something on Canva,
[Guest]: I was like, oh, that means someone has to create original artwork for me. So I went to an actual
[Guest]: artist friend, Satyak Gade, who's a wonderful illustrator, and he very kindly, you know,
[Guest]: came up with actual original artwork, which truly seems excessive for an endeavour of this size.
[Guest]: But so yeah, it's still it's, it's, I enjoy it very much. And, you know, it's an indulgence. It's
[Guest]: a very small thing. It has, you know, very few, very small numbers, very few listeners. So I know
[Guest]: I'm doing this for myself, and because I enjoy it, but yeah, I kept thinking, was there going to be
[Guest]: a time when I would have to start winding it down now that I've reached 100 episodes? Should I just
[Guest]: sort of call it off? But it's, I still enjoy it very much. So I'm going to continue doing it.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's, it's lovely. And this whole story of this podcast is so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: inspiring. And a shout out to Anant Krishnamurthy, old friend of mine, and someone like you rightly
[Amit Varma]: said, he's a he's a big name in these circles in Chennai. So for him to do a podcast is just
[Amit Varma]: shows, you know, his passion and his kindness as well. Remarkable chap. And I love the artwork,
[Amit Varma]: by the way. And you know, why I said I find it inspiring. And you know, I'm not being overly
[Amit Varma]: kind here is that, you know, when I spoke to you, when we were sort of laying out the logistics for
[Amit Varma]: this particular recording, and I was so surprised to hear that you don't have a mic and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: that you do it on your phone and the load, the kind of lo-fi way you've been doing it. And people
[Amit Varma]: keep asking me about advice on how to start podcasts. And there are two or three that have
[Amit Varma]: kind of helped bring into being. And I'm in fact, toying with the idea of teaching a course on
[Amit Varma]: starting a podcast. And what I would, you know, say to everyone who is listening is that listen,
[Amit Varma]: you do not need anything. Do not overthink it, just jump into it. You know, if there's something
[Amit Varma]: that you think you'll enjoy doing, just kind of, you know, jump into it. Don't overthink what is
[Amit Varma]: the mic I need? And how will I edit it? And, you know, and should it be 10 minutes or 12 minutes
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And I think people just need to kind of jump into stuff and let it find its
[Amit Varma]: own momentum. And congratulations on 100 episodes and the Emergent Ventures Prize. It's all,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so incredibly inspiring. Let's now talk a little bit about sort of the subject matter. And
[Amit Varma]: like you said, when you started, and we were really in what one could call the fog of pandemic,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, everybody's trying to figure it out. And you are sort of, in a sense, documenting
[Amit Varma]: your own intellectual journey through your podcast of figuring out what's going on. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where did that quest begin? Like, did you look at the way it was being reported and said,
[Amit Varma]: okay, these are the lacunae and these are the areas where I wish somebody was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: looking at XYZ? And hey, I'm going to do that. What's the available data at that time? How do
[Amit Varma]: you begin to make sense of it? There are so many models and projections also, you know, going
[Amit Varma]: around, where does one begin? What was your thinking in those early days when you kind of got
[Guest]: into it? So I think there were two stages to this. The first was the absolute, you know, early days
[Guest]: when I felt that there was very little sort of big picture reporting happening from India. I was
[Guest]: seeing a lot of this in the US and the UK. But I didn't feel like there was much reporting happening
[Guest]: that yet about the nature of the virus, how it spreads, what we know about aerosols, any of that
[Guest]: right then, because it was more about, you know, what the government's going to do, are we going
[Guest]: to have a lockdown, that sort of stuff in the early days. So I felt like I was able to at least
[Guest]: maybe not say things anew, but synthesize things anew. There was that sort of new endeavor to do
[Guest]: in that. But then the other thing that ended up happening very quickly, and you know, I know this
[Guest]: is a theme that I've talked about before as well, which is that I struggle a lot and think a lot
[Guest]: about polarization. And it became very evident to me very quickly that this had once again become
[Guest]: a left-right thing. And it really bothered me deeply, because it became very clear that for
[Guest]: people on the left, it was now becoming necessary to say that the Modi government was mishandling
[Guest]: everything, that its testing strategy was not just conservative, but was also conservative
[Guest]: to try to show low numbers, that there was, you know, pseudoscience running amok, that
[Guest]: there were soon going to be millions of deaths that was happening. And then on the other side,
[Guest]: immediately that the lockdown was an enormous success, the lockdown was going to make sure
[Guest]: that we were not going to have any more cases. You know, there's the very memorable graph by
[Guest]: DK Pal, the government's COVID task force, which showed, I think this was in early April,
[Guest]: and it showed a curve of cases rising, and then inexplicably on May 16, hitting zero.
[Guest]: I mean, it just nosedived into an axis in a way that you rarely see any graph anywhere doing.
[Guest]: So there was that sort of optimistic graph storytelling as well. And
[Guest]: it was incredibly frustrating to me that this was again, becoming a left right thing.
[Guest]: And I wanted to, I wanted to talk about, I'm not a science journalist, and I knew that there was
[Guest]: very little of the science that I was going to say anything meaningful about, I was listening
[Guest]: and reading about it. I'm interested, even though I'm not a good science communicator,
[Guest]: but I knew I wanted to talk about the policy parts of it. And in a way that could get through
[Guest]: this sort of frustrating left right situation that was already developing. So around mortality,
[Guest]: for example, you know, at the point at which numbers became large enough to start sort of
[Guest]: comparing with the rest of the world, it became clear that there was a larger story to tell
[Guest]: about mortality, which included the fact that India does underreport most deaths from most
[Guest]: diseases, while simultaneously reconciling with the fact that there did appear to be
[Guest]: lower COVID mortality in India than in some Western countries for reasons that needed to
[Guest]: be understood and analyzed. So I do remember feeling at that point that I absolutely had not
[Guest]: seen. And this is where we talk about, you know, the lack of imagination and how to tell stories,
[Guest]: right? You know, no one is going to pitch or get approval for an op-ed that says I'm going to,
[Guest]: I'm going to write an op-ed considering all the aspects of the mortality issue. News reporters
[Guest]: never go in for a 360 thing anyway, either. So this became a sort of way to be able to talk about
[Guest]: all of the different things that were happening on mortality. So yes, there were a couple of
[Guest]: very specific things that I felt that I was not hearing, or at least that I, you know,
[Guest]: wanted to synthesize and be able to say. And you know, the polarization, the politics is
[Amit Varma]: something that you mentioned in, you know, a bunch of episodes, episode 22 and 93 are about
[Amit Varma]: sort of the left-right binaries. You know, in episode 65, you handled, you know, another
[Amit Varma]: political issue, the discussion around hydroxychloroquine. You spoke about the missing
[Amit Varma]: deaths in episode 80, and whether, you know, the understating of deaths could have sort of a
[Amit Varma]: political impetus. And is it then from readers say, I mean, I know, like, thankfully, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that you're not on social media all the time and all of that. But is there also then a sense of
[Amit Varma]: frustration among some people that you're not sort of that you're going into a level of nuance
[Amit Varma]: that doesn't really fit any of the easy narratives? You are, you know, kind of carving your own path
[Amit Varma]: through it. Was it that sense also kind of happening? So, I get that from my regular
[Guest]: journalism a lot. I get that sort of response very often. So, for example, you know, I got pushed back
[Guest]: after, in the very early days, pre-lockdown as well, I wrote for Mint about death statistics
[Guest]: in general in India. So that, you know, the feeling of, let's go into this pandemic
[Guest]: with an understanding of how deaths get reported in India and where things might fall short.
[Guest]: And, you know, it was immediately, I mean, it's not uniform always, but there was some
[Guest]: criticism of that, okay, here you're already building a narrative that we're undercounting
[Guest]: deaths. So, I get that from my regular news reporting quite a bit. And this is where,
[Guest]: you know, as I said, I don't have big numbers at all on the podcast. And so, what I feel is,
[Guest]: you know, the podcast audience is, in some ways, a new sort of pandemic community has built a little
[Guest]: bit on social media as well. And many of them are scientists who are not epidemiologists,
[Guest]: but who are sort of more amateur enthusiasts. And that's a sweet spot for me because
[Guest]: I'm not going to make points of great interest to experts at all in any way. But people who want
[Guest]: slightly research-backed and considered arguments that look at a number of points of view,
[Guest]: this is of interest to them. So, no, what I actually get is, I get, you know,
[Guest]: appreciation for the nuance on the podcast, because that is a community that is very different from my
[Amit Varma]: news-reading community. Yeah, and that's, in fact, you know, even though you do T20s and I do test
[Amit Varma]: matches, I can say that I've kind of noticed the same difference with my podcast listeners,
[Amit Varma]: that I'll never get those kind of harsh, real, personal, almost toxic responses that one
[Amit Varma]: otherwise might get in social media, where people are just reading the headline of your piece and
[Amit Varma]: responding to that at the level of engagement and respect is much deeper, and in your case,
[Amit Varma]: obviously earned. One of the things that sort of interested me is that, you know, while charting
[Amit Varma]: the journey of your podcast, one of the beautiful things that you did was you decided that you'll
[Amit Varma]: ask one question in every episode. So, episode seven, why aren't we all wearing masks? Episode
[Amit Varma]: eight, there is, you know, how are hospitals treating the virus when we don't even know the
[Amit Varma]: cure? What will life after the lockdown look like? Should we trust the models? And so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. And it was interesting for me to see those questions evolve from sort of specific questions
[Amit Varma]: like around masks or around lockdowns and go to those deeper, broader questions as the series
[Amit Varma]: progressed. For example, in episode 20 and 21, you, you know, worried about how through this
[Amit Varma]: COVID crisis, our rights and our privacies and all of all of those are sort of being eroded and
[Amit Varma]: the danger of greater authoritarianism and the power of the state expanding. Tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about sort of your thinking on that. And do you feel that those worries are kind of borne out?
[Amit Varma]: What do we need to watch out for? What are the concrete signs that, you know, citizens are being
[Amit Varma]: even more disempowered than they already were? Right. So the question part of it, I thought I
[Guest]: was going, you know, I did feel like I was going into it with a questioning mind. And I did feel
[Guest]: like I was going and trying to answer the question each time. As it went on, I started worrying about
[Guest]: whether this was going to become like an artifact that I was hanging on to. But it hasn't. I do,
[Guest]: I do feel that I do have these questions and that I am in pursuit of some sort of answer
[Guest]: to them in each of these. I think, you know, there was a phase in the pandemic when we all wondered
[Guest]: how different things were going to be after this was all over. And, you know, I think we all went
[Guest]: through a phase of great hope, a feeling that there was going to be a sort of pan-human solidarity.
[Guest]: Then, you know, there were times when that evaporated and we worried if we were going to
[Guest]: get into a, you know, huge surveillance when Aarogya Setu started. That was, you know,
[Guest]: a real concern then. So all of those great hopes for great change, I think, have gone through their
[Guest]: own waves and dissipated a little. And I think what we're increasingly left with is that we're
[Guest]: going to be left with a world not dissimilar from what was there before, with some things having been
[Guest]: made worse for the most vulnerable people. So, you know, what we're seeing is, for example,
[Guest]: you know, jobs beginning to return. But everywhere people are seeing that working seniors are
[Guest]: deeply struggling. Anyone with very little elbow room is struggling deeply. So I don't think the
[Guest]: sort of dystopian vision that we were also once having was that, you know, all of the worst in
[Guest]: people was coming out, the sort of awful stigma that began at one point. And, you know, it seemed
[Guest]: like we were going to build the ghettos of our nightmares were now going to start coming up.
[Guest]: I think that's all also giving way to pragmatism. And that's not how things are going to be like
[Guest]: as well. But I don't know, I'm sure that there are going to be traumas from this period that
[Guest]: are not going to go away easily. So, for example, you know, I know it's extremely obvious,
[Guest]: but having recently spoken to someone about it, that there have been one million deaths worldwide.
[Guest]: So that is one million families, for the most part across the world, who were not able to get
[Guest]: a final goodbye. That is an enormous sort of shared drama that a truly large number of people
[Guest]: have had to go through. The sort of terrifying fears of the lockdown, which are now, you know,
[Guest]: now they're a bit of a distant memory. I don't go out that much as well. But
[Guest]: sometimes it's really something to remember, you know, that it was not allowed, you were not
[Guest]: allowed to leave home. And what that meant like for people for anyone for whom home was not happy.
[Guest]: Again, I know someone firsthand who lived an absolute nightmare through those days. And
[Guest]: that, again, is a huge cohort of people for whom that trauma of living in, you know,
[Guest]: imprisonment for those days is not going away. I don't think that, you know, either our worst
[Guest]: fears or our best hopes about the post-COVID world are going to come true. But there are going to be
[Guest]: scars and cleavages and maybe even little sort of seedlings of better things that will slowly
[Guest]: make themselves apparent, not in any of the terribly obvious ways that we had once wondered
[Guest]: about. But it's going to be that that part's going to be interesting to see how that changes.
[Guest]: You know, for example, one of the things that happened was a big change in the number of hours
[Guest]: of unpaid housework that men began to do. And that gap has narrowed significantly now.
[Guest]: But if that gap, you know, still that space remains, then that is still a fundamental
[Guest]: shift in society and what that means for the next 30 years. Because if that slight increment,
[Guest]: if we don't go back to that little bit of the old normal, that's still that's still something.
[Guest]: So, yeah, it's I don't think that there's going to be, you know, dramatic changes from what
[Guest]: happened. But, you know, a series of small and maybe even unknowable, as of now, changes.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just thinking aloud, it strikes me that what happened to all of us very suddenly,
[Amit Varma]: when all of this happened was that we were sort of, you know, living with complacence in
[Amit Varma]: the inertia of the cocoon of that normality, which we had built around ourselves. And by
[Amit Varma]: breaking us out of that, we were all forced to examine deeper truths of different kinds.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it could be that you cannot stand the person you're living with, maybe it could be
[Amit Varma]: that you discover new things about them and fall in love all over again, or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: in various different ways, we kind of broke out of, you know, the different cocoons we
[Amit Varma]: might have created, which were perhaps set in our everyday routines and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing I want to ask you about, and I guess you'd, I think you'd have insight on
[Amit Varma]: that in a different context also, and not just COVID, is when you were talking about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, fears of the surveillance of the state and all of that. And it struck me that
[Amit Varma]: the one thing that saves us from even greater oppression by the state is the incompetence of
[Amit Varma]: the state. Because the state typically just doesn't have state capacity, there isn't much
[Amit Varma]: depth and nuance to what they do, the tools with which they oppress are blunt tools.
[Amit Varma]: And many of these high tech tools of surveillance and even using Aaragya Setu in meaningfully
[Amit Varma]: oppressive ways is possibly beyond the state. Now, in a larger context, is that true? Because
[Amit Varma]: of course, you have to, you know, I'm sure you've thought very deeply about your relationship with
[Amit Varma]: the state, because in a lot of cases, you're depending on data from the state. And sometimes
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out before you realize that it's not that the bad data is necessarily malign,
[Amit Varma]: it is just incompetent. And what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, I find myself saying this a lot to people a lot, which is that
[Guest]: so much of what is imagined to be malice is actually incompetence. And I, you know,
[Guest]: this is a recurring theme through reporting and through reporting on data as well. And,
[Guest]: you know, assuming malafide is something that bothers me when people are talking about
[Guest]: people that they are ideologically opposed to, again, this is something that I felt that
[Guest]: marked some of the criticism of the government's handling of COVID as well, which is
[Guest]: frequently assuming malafide intentions, when I don't think it called for that,
[Guest]: you know, assuming suppression of numbers, when the sheer capacity to count properly,
[Guest]: you know, did not exist, assuming that the government was trying was, you know, keep reducing
[Guest]: tests so that it wouldn't discover more cases when I feel they just did not have the capacity
[Guest]: to conduct more tests then. And similarly, about deaths as well, when you see that this is
[Guest]: something that they fail, you know, they fail at with all diseases, it isn't a new decision to
[Guest]: start failing at it, when it comes to COVID. So, this is true. But I should also, you know,
[Guest]: sometimes I make this such a, I make such a point of this that I don't want to sort of fall in love
[Guest]: with my own point and get carried away with it as well. I do think I do this about the government
[Guest]: and incompetence. And occasionally, journalists prove malice. And it's great when they do that,
[Guest]: because it reminds me then that I shouldn't, I shouldn't assume that the bumbling lathiwala cop
[Guest]: is the Indian state. It's not true at all. There's a sort of lovable awfulness to that.
[Guest]: But that's not true. So, you know, one of the most excellent journalists of the last few years has
[Guest]: been Somesh Jha of Business Standard, who has come at data journalism in a way that I don't think I
[Guest]: have been able to do for the most part. And that is a very valuable new direction to be going,
[Guest]: which is to get into the making of the sausage and the corruption of the sausage makers to
[Guest]: extend this too far. He is the journalist who discovered that the government was sitting on
[Guest]: both employment and household consumption information data, which had been cleared by
[Guest]: all committees and was statistically sound, but showed uncomfortable truths as clear,
[Guest]: you know, as malafide intentions get is that showed the government in a poor light.
[Guest]: And then the government too was shameless enough to deny his news reporting, you know,
[Guest]: have surrogates criticize it and him, and then release exactly those numbers the day they came
[Guest]: back to power. I mean, that was one of the most brazen and shocking things to have happened when
[Guest]: it comes to data. You know, I too was willing to accept that, that there were some reasons that
[Guest]: there was some fine tuning, but this sort of brazen release of it on the day they came back to
[Guest]: power was truly shocking even to me. So, I think so much has done a good job of showing how much
[Guest]: malice exists as well. And, you know, much as I've criticized crime reporting so far, I think
[Guest]: sometimes what good crime reporters do is to show the most venal part of the Indian state,
[Guest]: right? The venality of cops can be, is sort of the most distilled form of the venality of the
[Guest]: Indian state sometimes. So, I like making that rather various ironic bumbling incompetence point,
[Guest]: but I think people like Soumesh and a lot of crime reporters are able to show that,
[Amit Varma]: that we wish it was as cute as that. Yeah. And I guess one thinking a lot,
[Amit Varma]: one could even say that, you know, even if the means are incompetent, the end is for all practical
[Amit Varma]: purposes malicious. I mean, what difference does it then make what the intent is if that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of where we've ended up? Let's kind of talk about COVID and your sort of understanding
[Amit Varma]: of it through data. So, you know, when it all broke and when you began the moving curve,
[Amit Varma]: what kind of data were you looking at specifically to make sense of all of it? And then how did that
[Amit Varma]: sense of what data should you look at evolve with time? How did the frame shift?
[Guest]: So, I think in the early days, a lot of what I was looking at was scientific research rather than
[Guest]: data. And then I think that continued for the most part. So again, when it comes to COVID and data,
[Guest]: I think this was one more moment when I had to re-examine one of my favorite beliefs about the
[Guest]: Indian state, which is I often get a bit annoyed by people cribbing about how little data the
[Guest]: government puts out or how little data that exists, what difficult formats it is in, because I don't
[Guest]: think that there's very little. I think there's quite a bit. I think it lacks in some key areas
[Guest]: and might be frustrating to not have that there. There's a periodicity issue for sure, because it
[Guest]: just takes so long to put things together. And sure, formats are annoying, but there are tech
[Guest]: solutions for that. But when this came around, I had to accept that the amount of data that the
[Guest]: government was and is until today putting out was a real shame and a real travesty. And either it's
[Guest]: appalling that government systems are only able to capture that much data, or it's appalling that
[Guest]: they think and have successfully until now got away with giving us that little.
[Guest]: So I look not only at Western countries' data, I look at quite a few Latin American countries'
[Guest]: data as well. And I've looked at South Africa at least. And for all of this, I go to their
[Guest]: government websites and use Google Translate. Chile, Peru, everybody is able to put out,
[Guest]: drill down to the smallest municipality, historical data for confirmed cases, deaths,
[Guest]: in some cases hospitalizations. Some countries put out asymptomatic, symptomatic. Some of them
[Guest]: put out probable cases. All of this in downloadable form. I have not come across a single country that
[Guest]: officially puts out as little data as the Indian government does. And it's just shameful that we've
[Guest]: allowed them to get away with this, to the point that every international media organization and
[Guest]: researcher uses a crowdsourced website. All of us use covid19india.org, which is an amazing
[Guest]: resource put together by people seeking no credit and money, who collate official data from
[Guest]: government handles. And all of us are just using it and considering it acceptable to be using it
[Guest]: from a.org website, when this is absolutely the core job of a government. And I have not seen any
[Guest]: country that does such a poor job. I have not seen a single Latin American country or any of the
[Guest]: few African countries that I've seen do such a poor job of putting out data in the pandemic. So,
[Guest]: you know, reporting on data was limited in the early days. Now we have, we have through covid19india.org
[Guest]: and through other, some sort of research efforts based in India as well, you know, more data to
[Guest]: write about. But even now, the most interesting insights to me continue to come from scientific
[Guest]: research. Understanding just how the virus spreads, among whom and why, remains the key thing to try
[Guest]: and understand for people trying to live their lives going forward. And I hope what we're going
[Guest]: to have now, we've had one good paper coming out of India so far, I hope what we're going to have
[Guest]: more of now is good Indian scientific, you know, and by good I mean not published in ICMR's own
[Guest]: ICMR's own in-house journal, but in sort of peer-reviewed reputed journals that explain
[Amit Varma]: transmission patterns in India. And from what you're saying, you know, would it be correct also
[Amit Varma]: to say that Indians fundamentally have a shallow understanding of what it means to be a democracy,
[Amit Varma]: that we often think of democracy as, oh, there are elections and we vote one of the competing
[Amit Varma]: mafias into power, but actually democracy should also include the state being accountable to the
[Amit Varma]: citizens and empowering them with information, which is why data becomes so important. It's
[Amit Varma]: not an aside that, oh, other states do this particular thing well and we don't. This should
[Amit Varma]: actually be essential to what the state does and, you know, in a sense, part of the justification
[Guest]: for its existence. Would you agree with that? Yeah, I do agree with that, though I don't fully
[Guest]: agree with the shallow democracy part of it. I mean, it is, it's sort of like a puddle that's
[Guest]: shallow in parts and deep in others. This part is certainly shallow in the expectation that
[Guest]: government should give you this information. And you see it from just the, you know,
[Guest]: the attitude that anyone assumes in a government office while demanding information that the
[Guest]: office requires in law to give you. But it's still a sort of, you know, please can I have
[Guest]: this posture that everybody is sort of obliged to take up? And yes, I've had this in a couple
[Guest]: of interactions with government officials myself. At one point, some weeks ago, I,
[Guest]: at the point when Telangana was having a pretty bad time with its numbers,
[Guest]: Casey, our son, did a ask me anything sort of thing on Twitter. So I asked why Telangana bulletin had
[Guest]: so much less information than other states did, which was an issue and still is. And he replied
[Guest]: saying, no, it's all in there. And it wasn't. And I said, you know, the reason I'm asking you is
[Guest]: because it's not in there. And he didn't get back to me further. Then one of the, you know,
[Guest]: municipal corporations that's been doing a relatively good job with data is Mumbai. And
[Guest]: there's a very impressive IAS officer who's leading the data side of things as well. So
[Guest]: recently on Twitter, I pointed out to her that while they had this dashboard that was doing a
[Guest]: very good job, like most government websites, it was updated afresh every day with no archive,
[Guest]: like, you know, one of those sort of Cinderella things where everything disappears at midnight
[Guest]: every day, which is so deeply frustrating to me to not be able to say, you know, make a chart for
[Guest]: myself looking at trends over time. And she said, well, we don't want to overburden people with
[Guest]: information. Anyone who wants more can always get in touch with us. And I just thought, I mean,
[Guest]: how hard would it be just to just have a dropdown where you give the option of having historical
[Guest]: data there. But, you know, that was, I mean, although she seems really great at her job and
[Guest]: has done a lot, there was that attitude of, you know, don't ask us for excessive amounts of
[Guest]: information. So this was something that every, you know, municipality in Colombia, for example,
[Guest]: is putting out. There's another official in Bangalore as well, who's really very good on
[Guest]: data and very good at sharing as well. But one of the things that India has been doing,
[Guest]: that many Indian states are doing, which is quite unusual, is doing much more rapid antigen tests
[Guest]: than the sort of gold standard RT-PCR test. There's ways to argue it either way. It's a
[Guest]: discussion to be had. And one of the things that, you know, would be very valuable to have is the
[Guest]: relative positivity rates for antigen tests versus RT-PCR. And no state is putting out that
[Guest]: information. Mumbai puts it out in a graph. And when I asked for it in Excel form, I was told,
[Guest]: you know, that's an excessive amount of information to ask for. And similarly, the Bangalore person
[Guest]: was not happy to be asked about it, said Delhi doesn't put it out. How many columns can we put
[Guest]: in every page? So, yeah, there is that information, that attitude even among the relatively, the ones
[Guest]: who are putting out much more data than you're used to getting from and are much more responsive
[Guest]: than you're used to government officials of, you know, don't push this so far. Don't ask for like
[Guest]: Excel sheets, you know, it's pretty good how far we're getting. So definitely that attitude of
[Guest]: anything more than sort of the headline number is a favor we're doing for you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Well, you know, one of the things I sort of noticed through the series is that it is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, not just about COVID. It is about a lot else. And a lot of that comes from,
[Amit Varma]: you know, prior work you must have done. For example, in episode three, you know, there is
[Amit Varma]: sort of what was certainly a new insight for me where you say, quote, poor people report more
[Amit Varma]: illness, but less hospitalization. We'll stop quote. And again, that's something that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: was an important insight. And I had to kind of sit down and process it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you've touched on many sort of larger issues, like what would COVID mean for India's
[Amit Varma]: women in episode 47, Dalits in episode 46, children in episode 70. In fact, you had multiple episodes
[Amit Varma]: where you've looked at the impact on parents and children. Now, you know, one thing that is often
[Amit Varma]: said, you know, Orville has spoken about the link between writing and thinking and one saw that is
[Amit Varma]: often given is that just forcing yourself to write clearly forces you to think more clearly. And one
[Amit Varma]: of the things that sort of struck me was that by the end of the series, and of course, it hasn't
[Amit Varma]: ended, but you know, at episode 99, where we are and just touching 100, what struck me was that
[Amit Varma]: you've gone in there asking questions as a generalist, which all journalists are in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: they are generalists. But have you then by asking questions repeatedly, repeatedly, repeatedly
[Amit Varma]: looking at the data, looking at the research, in a manner of speaking, transformed yourself into an
[Amit Varma]: expert of sorts also, just has the process of reporting on something for so long, which such
[Amit Varma]: depth enhanced your understanding of the subject, kind of massively. What I definitely feel it has
[Guest]: done is expose me to a much wider range of perspectives than would have come to me normally.
[Guest]: Yes, I do think that some of the that you know, the complete cluelessness of the early days has
[Guest]: been replaced with some baseline understanding. But this is the thing it's every day continues
[Guest]: to bring in very key fundamental, not esoteric aspects of it at all very key fundamental parts
[Guest]: that I have no, not the slightest answer to, to the point that when I begin by asking the question,
[Guest]: it's I'm really not being cute. I actually don't know. So for example, right now, if you know,
[Guest]: if I would like to fashion myself as some sort of expert now, I should be able to say in at least
[Guest]: one line, why have the cases started reducing from mid September. And because I haven't worked
[Guest]: on it for an episode, I have no clue, I wouldn't be able to answer it in a single word. I have not
[Guest]: one word of explanation for why this is. So no, I would only feel that I'm able to say much more
[Guest]: about the things that I have looked at. But I don't feel any closer to feeling that I understand.
[Guest]: And I don't understand why it's spread more widely in some places than others. I haven't
[Guest]: seen convincing explanations for the most basic things. And this is one more thing where we,
[Guest]: you know, you, I, I would come back to journalism, regular sort of mainstream journalism,
[Guest]: which is how, how is it that I haven't in any news publication yet seen, forget an answer,
[Guest]: at least an attempt at answering. Why did Pune have so many cases? I mean, why did Pune district
[Guest]: have like four and a half thousand cases per day at a point? Why did Pune city have over 2000 cases
[Guest]: for so many days? There's no good, you know, forget good explanation. I can't see anything
[Guest]: that got anywhere near answering that. Then why did Punjab have such incredibly high mortality
[Guest]: for a period? And, you know, the numbers in Punjab are still not numbers I properly understand.
[Guest]: And then again, the news reporting says things like rumors spread on WhatsApp about,
[Guest]: you know, treatments or some rumors spread on WhatsApp everywhere in the country. There's no
[Guest]: way to understand why in particular in Punjab, this is what happened. Why are Bihar's numbers
[Guest]: so low? I mean, it has to go beyond just a low population density because that, so, you know,
[Guest]: no one has, this is, I just don't know if people are going in with clearly questioning minds,
[Guest]: because if you can start with a position of humility, of accepting that there is a big
[Guest]: central question that you have no idea what the answer to it is, maybe that would help you
[Guest]: A, frame questions that people actually want the answers to, and then B, get any closer to
[Guest]: answering them, rather than regurgitating what some expert panel is saying. So, there is some
[Guest]: government expert panel that's saying, you know, this September was a peak and things will taper
[Guest]: off by Feb, but no convincing explanation of why this has happened now. So, yeah, I don't feel
[Guest]: I don't feel at all able to answer those things. And I don't see the attempt to answering it,
[Guest]: attempt to getting to those questions more widely as well.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, one of the sort of things that struck me and impressed me while going through
[Amit Varma]: the full series was not necessarily, you know, even if you don't listen to the episodes,
[Amit Varma]: even if you just go to the medium page, and you look at the question that's been asked for
[Amit Varma]: every episode, I think so much of our quest for the truth really comes from asking good questions,
[Amit Varma]: which we don't see enough of. And, you know, you've asked, you know, almost every episode
[Amit Varma]: has interesting questions, like Episode 71, what does the lockdowns, disruption and health services
[Amit Varma]: mean for the health of Indians now in general? 72, what is it like to deal with COVID-19 in
[Amit Varma]: rural India? 44, where does COVID fit into India's disease landscape? On Labor Day, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: Episode 38, you asked, what is the future for work and workers? You know, what would life after the
[Amit Varma]: lockdown look like? And it seems to me that just the act of being able to frame these questions
[Amit Varma]: comes from a sort of a position of insight, you know, I've taken enough of your time,
[Amit Varma]: and I don't want you to actually answer any of these questions here, because I would rather that
[Amit Varma]: listeners go and listen to all those episodes, sort of like Rukmini said at the start, it's like
[Amit Varma]: T20 matches, you know, five minute episodes, six minute episodes. And I don't say that disparagingly,
[Amit Varma]: I'm just, I'm just full of enormous envy that, you know, one can pack in so much insight into
[Amit Varma]: that kind of space. So I'll probably end with a couple of questions. And, you know, my penultimate
[Amit Varma]: question really comes from, I guess, my self interest and the self interest of all of
[Amit Varma]: the listeners who are still sort of struggling to cope with COVID in this difficult year.
[Amit Varma]: And that comes from a question that you in fact, asked in episode 66, where you asked,
[Amit Varma]: how do we measure the risk to ourselves? And this strikes me as an important question to ask,
[Amit Varma]: because what we often see is a kind of pandemic fatigue has set in a lockdown fatigue, where
[Amit Varma]: people are like, just screw it, you know, it's fine. And, you know, all of that, and
[Amit Varma]: maybe people doing things they shouldn't do. But at the same time, you know, one can't blame them,
[Amit Varma]: it's just horrible to live with this discipline and wear masks all the time and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What is your sense? How would you advise people on
[Amit Varma]: how to sort of navigate the road ahead in the months to come?
[Guest]: So I wouldn't like to think of this as advice, but
[Guest]: more sort of what I feel I've heard, that makes more sense and is most convincing for me.
[Guest]: So, you know, intimate, closed, mixed age events seem like a terrible idea.
[Guest]: You know, research has shown this across the world and in India as well.
[Guest]: Long shared transport is also a bad idea, though with the level of masking compliance that,
[Guest]: you know, flights require, that might need to be recalibrated for that.
[Guest]: But the thing is, what remains is, because there are so many unknowables,
[Guest]: it's hard to understand what it is exactly that shakes some of these broad trends.
[Guest]: So what suddenly causes, you know,
[Guest]: deaths among younger people without comorbidities is impossible to say.
[Guest]: You know, there was a period of time where young children were experiencing an inflammatory
[Guest]: condition sort of associated with SARS-CoV-2, even though it wasn't directly that.
[Guest]: So it's hard to say what those characteristics of those kids were and who were facing that.
[Guest]: I suppose what I've taken broadly away for myself is as much as possible,
[Guest]: whatever my privilege allows me to continue avoiding, I am continuing avoiding.
[Guest]: So for example, I know everyone with little kids is, or even older kids who aren't going
[Guest]: to school now is being driven up the wall now, having done this and homeschooling.
[Guest]: But whoever's privilege allows them to continue keeping children at home,
[Guest]: it seems to me like a good idea to do that.
[Guest]: Now, recent research is showing just how much spreading happens
[Guest]: among children and among intergenerational cohorts that include children as well.
[Guest]: It's something we need to take more seriously in India, especially.
[Guest]: You know, anyone who can continue working from home,
[Guest]: all of those seem like things to continue to try to do.
[Guest]: But, you know, I want to be very mindful, not just of
[Guest]: work and money-related privileges, but also mental health, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to advise these things to people struggling without
[Guest]: other people to talk to, without other outlets, maybe even safety.
[Guest]: So I think everyone is trying to build
[Guest]: matrices of what they can avoid and what they must do.
[Guest]: And, you know, these are going to be deeply personal things for most people.
[Guest]: But, you know, the broad things of closed indoor events,
[Guest]: any sort of, you know, large mass gatherings, of course, masking, you know.
[Guest]: Though I have to say what frustrates me is that
[Guest]: I still not seen proper research about cotton masks, the sort that we're all using.
[Guest]: I know that there was simulation, which was, you know,
[Guest]: the sort of when the advice was put out.
[Guest]: But, yeah, I'm an absolutely passionate mask user and my little children use them as well.
[Guest]: So I don't mean that I haven't seen anything to convince me.
[Guest]: I'm completely convinced.
[Guest]: I'm just saying that I would love to see a great research paper around it by now.
[Guest]: So, yeah, these are the decisions I'm taking to just continue.
[Guest]: My life has not really changed that much.
[Guest]: Even since the lockdown, I still don't go out that much because as much as I can,
[Guest]: you know, part of reporting on all of this is not just feeling that feeling terrible
[Guest]: for the people who weren't able to continue staying in and, you know,
[Guest]: realizing your enormous privilege in that.
[Guest]: And to be very, to be, to remain humble in the face of this virus,
[Guest]: to not feel that there are ways to be, you know, to not feel that youth
[Guest]: or any of these sort of guarantees against it.
[Guest]: I remain extremely humble in the face of the virus.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: And now my final question, which is, you know, almost a bit of a cliche to my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: I think, but I have to ask it.
[Amit Varma]: And especially in your sense, since, you know, your amazing journalism has given you such,
[Amit Varma]: or at least has caused you to think so deeply about our democracy and our society.
[Amit Varma]: If I ask you to, say, look ahead to 2030, away from this cursed year 2020 and look ahead to 2030,
[Amit Varma]: what gives you hope and what gives you despair about what our country, our society,
[Amit Varma]: our democracy is going through and could go through in this time?
[Guest]: I see this, I hope it remains true.
[Guest]: So what gives me hope is that I see enormous transformational power
[Guest]: among people who fall in love.
[Guest]: It amazes me the, I mean, first of all, the amount of love I see around,
[Guest]: and I mean this in a sort of, you know, romantic love among young people.
[Guest]: That's sort of, it's incredible.
[Guest]: I mean, people are on the phone with each other all the time and finding places.
[Guest]: And the power to take radical decisions around being in love is really quite something.
[Guest]: I see it quite a bit.
[Guest]: I hope it continues to grow.
[Guest]: And the strength in that is something else.
[Guest]: So it's one of the few things that gives me, it gives me hope that people will take,
[Guest]: that young people will take otherwise enormous leaps that they might not have planned to,
[Guest]: just out of being in love.
[Guest]: So that's my extremely strange, you know, that's something that gives me hope.
[Guest]: I see it a lot around me.
[Guest]: And when people tell me, you know, I don't know,
[Guest]: some people want to tell you, when they know that you've had a love marriage,
[Guest]: people want to tell you their stories very often.
[Guest]: And the things that people tell you about, you know,
[Guest]: leaving home and just getting into a bus with no money.
[Guest]: And it's just, it's amazing.
[Guest]: It's so brave and it's very, it's something else.
[Guest]: So that gives me hope.
[Guest]: And the immense self-respect and pride that young people have,
[Guest]: much more than every generation, increasingly so, gives me hope.
[Guest]: What fills me with despair is, I think, conservatism among young people,
[Guest]: again, is what fills me with despair.
[Guest]: Conservatism among older people, less so.
[Guest]: But, yeah, to hear, I can't currently see enough outlets and pushback against the sort of toxic
[Guest]: Muslim hatred that is being pushed in most of the country.
[Guest]: I can't see ways out of it right now.
[Guest]: I don't see, I don't see like a big movement of young, anyone,
[Guest]: of people strongly saying that this is a totally unacceptable thing.
[Guest]: And, you know, we're going to put, really put our weight behind it.
[Guest]: So, yeah, the Muslim hatred in this country is what gives me greatest despair.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed. And, you know, we'll cycle back to the hope so we can end on a note of hope.
[Amit Varma]: You are literally the first guest over, you know, 196 episodes,
[Amit Varma]: who's spoken of romantic love as something that, you know, gives them hope.
[Amit Varma]: And it's such a delightful answer.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll sort of, you know, advise all my young listeners now that do not be conservative,
[Amit Varma]: fall in love, but at the same time, don't get into a bus with no money.
[Amit Varma]: That's not such a good idea.
[Amit Varma]: I know it really well, so do it.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, but wear a mask also.
[Amit Varma]: Definitely don't get in without a mask.
[Amit Varma]: Rukmini, thank you so much for being so patient with your time and so generous with your insights.
[Amit Varma]: It was so amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Having a podcaster like yourself, having a T20 star in a test match is so delightful.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: A huge pleasure.
[Guest]: And thank you to your listeners.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: where I've linked Rukmini's exceptional podcast, The Moving Curve.
[Amit Varma]: And you will also find a lot of her journalism over there.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Rukmini on Twitter at Rukmini.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye.